Morena,
Morina,
RA amai ha ma.
Uh, welcome everybody from Tata ti
and, um, uh, we've got members
of the Mafi Select Committee here across Parliament.
Uh, looking forward to having a good, uh, quarter at all
with you about, uh, past, present, and future for Tata ti.
Um, I might just start giving,
we've got a three hour meeting if, um, my, my Ali,
would you, uh, like to just do an opening for, um, us.
I think you've done that in the past. And, uh,
uh, Annu, uh, congratulations on your appointment.
And, um, thank you for being with us today with your team.
Uh, we've got a fair amount of time with you today, um,
that you'd probably be aware.
We've got the structured agenda we're following. Yes.
Uh, but maybe we, um, leave it over to you
to make some opening remarks, um, maybe
for six minutes or so.
And then members are just keen to, uh, get in
and have a good call with you today.
It,
um, well, I, I've picked up the Batten from, uh, Lil, uh,
Anderson, who finished last week
after five years as the inaugural of, uh,
uh, who departure signals the end of an era,
but the start of a new one.
Um, well,
and the team have given me a comprehensive handover in the
last week or so.
Um, in the last few days in particular, um,
I officially started as interim C on Monday, so
keep fresh under the desk.
Um, so, um, you'll have to forgive me for today.
I'll, I'll rely quite heavily on my, uh, senior colleagues
and others, all senior colleagues, um, to answer some
of your questions, uh, over the next few hours.
Um, and each of them, if you don't mind,
we'll introduce themselves, um,
as we move through the session.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'd like to start
by sharing a little bit about my experience.
Um, while I'm new to the role, I spent most
of my career working on treaty
and Maori Development matters.
Um, so not new to me.
Um, my first job out of school was with the, uh, department
of Maori Affairs, uh,
as a legal clerk in the Maori housing section in
the, in the late eighties.
Um, and I've been a policy analyst at pretty, uh,
subsequently the Ministry of Commerce, uh,
where I worked on, um, tele telecommunications
and broadcasting issues.
And I've worked at the Office of Treaty Settlements, um,
predecessor to ti obviously, uh, the Treasury
and TI as an advisor and, uh,
and a negotiator for the Crown.
Um, I spent seven years at, uh, department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet as a policy advisor, um, looking
after treaty Maori Development, department of Conservation,
um, minerals, programum,
and a bunch of other, uh, portfolios.
Um, and while, while there,
I also chaired the officials group supporting the Treaty
Ang, uh, cabinet Committee, uh, for,
and at that point, at that time, it was chaired by the, uh,
prime Minister Key, um, as the interim, uh,
ce, my primary focus is on leading
and our MAHI through the current transfer
and change processes, while ensuring we continue
to deliver high quality outcomes
for ministers Iwi Maori and the public.
Um, the change process we are working through
come on the back significant changes, as we all know,
in the previous financial years year,
those changes include a change of government,
a change in the settlement landscape,
and changing relationships between Maori and the Crown.
Like all departments was asked
to find savings in delivering its core business.
Uh, but we know we will need
to make further savings going forward as we, um, reorient
and focus our business on p settlement negotiations.
And while the performance framework
presented to this committee earlier this year still stands.
So it's still at the heart of what we do and,
and how we focus our work.
It will need revisiting
after the training change processes are complete.
So we are in a state of transition, uh,
but we intend to, as quickly
as possible refine our, our focus.
Um, I want to acknowledge that
through all the changes over the last year, little
and the staff have continued delivering on their strategic
priorities with the commitment
and professionalism that the government
and Iwi Maori have come to expect from them.
And that will continue. An example of this is the way
worked on Ang worked with the Ang National Trust
and lead the government to allegation
during Ang earlier this year,
while 10 tensions between Maori
and the Crown were high events that Waitangi were peaceful
and provided a range of opportunities for the government
to engage with Maori from the Breakfast with business
and Iwi leaders to the open forum at Tea Mague.
So, I intend to do my best to support ti to support the,
of ti to maintain the approach
and track record that they've established over the years
as we prepare to elevate our focus
and, I guess get laser focus on treaty settlements
and ana, which will be, you know, remain
as the main part of our business.
As you know, um, prior to this session,
we sent the committee an A three summary, so you should
all have it in your pack there of, uh,
key key achievements in 2023, uh, 24.
Um, while we cover much of this work in the next couple
of hours, uh, through the, through the session
and questions, uh, I'd like to, um, a few areas I'd like
to highlight across our strategic PO of restoring,
sustaining, and growing the Crown Maori relationship
in the last financial year
achieved eight settlement milestones, including the passing
of the f**k the Hoya claims settlement bill
that concluded three decades of negotiations between the Bay
of 30 Iwi and the Crown.
As alluded to earlier,
the settlement landscape has changed significantly, uh,
marked by the signing of the 100th deed of settlement
in this case, Taranaki Monga in September last year.
We are now firmly in a post settlement era, uh,
with completed settlements covering most
of the country progressing.
PU settlement is a priority for us in this context,
and continues to engage with
and support MAI as it prepares the groundwork
for negotiations and builds its investment fund.
Nu enabling the recognition
of customer KU Leaders of Rights, which particularly
challenging for last year with 380 active
ANA applications, the unprecedented demand
for the Financial Assistance Scheme
and the proposed amendments to section 58 of the Marine
and Coastal Area Act TE supported
applicant groups across 11 coastlines and
provided, found research and evidence
in five high court areas.
222 applicant groups accessed funding
through the Financial Assistance scheme,
which contributes toward the costs
of progressing those applications.
The unprecedented demand on the scheme was mainly due
to the number of con number and complexity of cases
before the high court, so
that 54 applicant groups could participate
in the five high court cases.
The government approved an additional, uh,
approved additional funding of seven P $17.3 million
to meet the exceptional demand,
and has put in place urgent measures
to manage the scheme within its appropriation.
This financial year progressed work on the proposed
amendments to section 58 of the Marine
and Coastal Area Act that clarifies the test
for customary Marine title.
The amendments also overturn the Court of Appeal decision
for what has become known as the Edwards case.
The Supreme Court has,
however, just issued its judgment on the Edwards case this
week, and Minister Goldsmith is taking time
to consider the implications
that this may have for the amendment.
Bill in the House has a role,
he's had a role in overseeing the Crown's delivery
of more than 14,000 treaty settlement commitments.
Last year was the first year
that Core Crown agencies have reported against all
of those commitments in teta the, uh, settlement portal
and in the annual reports,
when the post settlement issues do arise, can lean in
with ex with its experience in negotiating treaty
settlements and its extensive relationships
with other crown agencies.
And Iwi worked on 55 post-settlement
issues last year, and resolved 25 of them.
Eight of those post-settlement issues were significant,
including the contaminated Woodburn Air base
and the delay in returning the AYA Airport to the far north
in the case of the Woodburn Air Base.
Three, coulda hope or iwi sign an agreement with
and the Defense Force in October this year
to receive a payment for their respective treaty settlements
in lieu of a large proportion of the air base land
that was contaminated.
So in closing, Mr.
Chairman, ti continues to achieve positive outcomes
for the Crown for Iwi Maori and for the wider public.
This includes supporting the creation
and the installation of Modi, the carvings,
and the Moori Marcus that ado that now adorn the front
of parliament.
Their presence is a physical representation
of the partnership between local iwi, AWA,
Tara, and Parliament.
As mentioned earlier, I'll be relying heavily on my
leadership team to answer your in depth,
in depth questions on the annual review
for the remainder of the session.
Mr. Chairman, that ends my opening remarks killed.
Yeah. Uh, thank you Anad for your opening remarks
and for stepping up into the role
and, um, certainly want to acknowledge Lil Anderson
for her service, um, across many, many years.
And thank you to your team.
Uh, we've always had a really
good interaction with your team.
Excellent. And the treaty settlements that we deal
with on the success committee.
So, look, now we're moving into parts one
and two of the structured agenda, uh,
focused on past and present.
So we will, um, hand it now over to the honorable Penny.
Agree. Mr. Chair, uh,
thank you very much for, uh, leading us with your, so
that our today will be fruitful and successful.
Uh,
uh, secondly, just to acknowledge you
and your vast experience you bring to this role that
one might say that, um, you were built for this role, uh,
given, as you said, it's a new chapter, and,
and I want to acknowledge that, but also, uh, the outgoing
of my, the team that are here today.
My question is, uh, while I enjoyed
what you said about all of the milestones
and the framework that you have to report
to an annual report, what I didn't get a sense from in the
annual report is all of the great work
that data Fatia are doing, uh, the key milestones
of treaty settlements are fine.
But for example, and I used the example earlier in the
committee come together yesterday.
These are all excellent things that, um,
just don't really jump out of the annual report,
which I think goes some way to bringing on this journey.
And I wondered if you had any reflections
or the team had any reflections about
why perhaps it doesn't do that in the annual report.
Um, those achievements over the last 12 months,
you've numbered them, which I think is really cool.
Uh, you've got a clear understanding of them.
Uh, but in order to take our country on the journey,
we need the story to be told.
And I wanted to create reflections,
Um, DCE,
uh, strategy, policy and legal.
Um, I'm also wearing the DCE acting hat
for organizational service.
Uh, so thank you. Good job.
Thank you, uh, for your question.
Um, yeah, we, we, uh, we would love
to tell our story better.
Um, and I think there are, um, lots of things that we do,
uh, that, uh, um, I accept your, your, um, your, your view
that perhaps, uh,
we aren't telling our story as best we can.
Um, the, the thing that comes to my mind, uh,
are all the fantastic things that do happen
within a treaty segment.
We might say, uh, we met this milestone.
Um, but if I think about the occasion we had at Parliament,
uh, just recently, uh,
and I think about the there, uh, from, uh,
uh, from the Iwi side about how important it was to them,
uh, that the history of the Crown's interactions with, uh,
that iwi were recorded in the historical account.
Um, historical accounts in every treaty settlement are a way
of telling our national story.
Mm-Hmm. Um, being able to write all
of those historical accounts into an annual report, uh,
that doesn't, doesn't quite work.
Uh, but to be able to appreciate, uh, the depth
of feeling
and appreciation for, um, an apology for from the Crown for
breach acknowledgements of, uh, uh, by the ground of,
of breach historical breaches of the treat of Wang.
And particularly, uh, the thing that stands out from,
for me, just from that example, was the struggle that, uh,
that Iwi had and being believed in some of the al uh,
and I'm thinking about the, uh, poisoned flower, uh, story
that was particularly powerful.
Uh, and I think that, uh, being able
to expose those stories, uh, as you suggest, uh, more widely
to the New Zealand public, uh, that would be a great thing.
Um, uh, the annual report, um, we have to account
for, uh, what is, uh, um, the investment that the,
uh, the public makes, uh, in, uh,
and, uh, the key things that we're expected to deliver, um,
are treaty settlement negotiations and outcomes,
and are, uh, recognition of AKA Taiwan rights.
That is the progression of the Maori crown relationship,
the lifting of ground capability.
Those are the things that we are trying to report against.
Um, and I, I accept that there's a, uh, a bit
of a trade off in, um, trying to be able
to tell the stories, uh, against the, the measures.
Um, what we have tried to do in the annual report is, uh,
have pop out stories, uh, where we select, uh, one
or two things in each, each particular area.
Uh, and those are designed to, to highlight in the same way
that, you know, we can give you an A three that says,
we think this was, uh, some of our best work.
Um, and sometimes we have to count numbers,
uh, rather than stories.
And I think you're right. We lose some depth out of that.
Thanks, continue. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Supplementary to that on the numbers, um,
you highlight in the A three
and also in the report, uh, reporting against, uh,
your financial outcomes for the last year.
My question to you is, in any way, do you think
that's been restricting in the work that you've been able
to do with Iwi, given the vast challenges
that you've already highlighted?
Um, and also perhaps, um,
and without getting ahead of the agenda, some
of the aspiration that title has?
Um, no, I don't think so.
Uh, I, I think that, um, uh, gee, we, we,
we feel like we've got our arms full already.
Um, so, uh, in, in that sense, uh,
uh, if we, uh, had greater investment,
um, then you can always, I suppose, do do more with more.
Um, but it's always a, a question for any government about,
uh, uh, where to invest across the, the vast, um, array
of things that government needs to do.
Um, I think for the investment that's made in, we, uh,
do the very best that we, uh, we can with it.
Um, and, and I mean, part of my answer
to your question about whether we could do more, um,
sometimes our work is, uh, our work is
in the treaty settlement space, for instance,
and that's the majority of our work.
Uh, we can only go at the, at the pace, uh,
of our negotiating partners.
Um, and sometimes, uh, um, the readiness of the groups
that we are working with, uh, isn't, isn't always, uh, um,
matched to, to our readiness.
Um, that's our ambition to stand ready, uh, when, uh,
any group, uh, wishes to advance their,
their treaty settlement.
Um, I think it's also, uh, fair to say that, um, uh,
there's, there's only so much that each
of our negotiating teams can do in a, um, uh,
in a, a worthy way.
Uh, these are weighty subjects.
We want to make sure that, um, referred
to historical accounts, that we make a good job of telling,
uh, those stories that requires in depth
engagement with the ii.
Uh, so, um, yeah, we, we we're doing, uh, I think a good job
with, uh, the investment that's made in this,
uh, uh, Steve Abel.
Mine's a sub to that, really. Yeah. Thank you.
Because, um, you've alluded to the
relationship quality
and durability being the primary drivers
and pace of settlement runs counter to that potential.
So do you feel like you are under pressure
from the government side to hurry up
and get on with settlements, when actually the ability
to let them run at a more natural pace that is consistent
with, uh, the party that you're trying to settle with,
would be better, less pressure on the pace?
Hmm. I might have go with that,
and then I might turn to fe,
but, um, I think overall, no, we're, we're not running to,
uh, set, um, uh, to a pace that, uh,
that outpaces, uh, our partners.
I think that's, uh, um, uh, a lesson that we've had
to learn actually, uh, over the history of,
of treaty settlements, um, uh, mentioned, you know,
landmark, uh, settlement, uh, this,
this over this 23, 24 cycle.
Um, I was involved in that negotiation, uh, at a time when,
uh, we were needing to defend our practice in the, uh,
Ang Tribunal, uh, where we were criticized for exactly, uh,
that, that, that, uh, that point about running ahead
to trying to work two milestones, uh, when the
level of, uh, mandate, uh, for the
mandated group we were working with, uh,
and the level of opposition to that mandate, we weren't, uh,
understanding, uh, as well
as the tribunal suggested we we should Mm-Hmm.
Um, so I think that, uh, you probably have noticed,
uh, a we,
we've managed eight key milestones over the last year.
I think there have been years
where we've been well into double digits of,
uh, reaching milestones.
Uh, we are at the, uh, the back end of treaty settlements
and the ones that we have in front of us, uh,
and still on our work program, uh, largely the harder ones
to, uh, to, to reach.
Uh, and so they are taking more time.
Uh, and that's, that's a factor of, uh,
both the Crown wanting to move at a pace
that is comfortable, uh, for the groups that we work with,
while still agreeing through the terms of negotiation,
a shared ambition, uh, about how we want to take, um,
uh, the settlement forward.
And that does include an agreement around, okay, what's the,
what's the rhythm that we, we want to take,
and how fast do we want to be able to progress?
Can I, can I just add to that?
I think, um, also the groups we are working with,
the claimant groups, as you all know, are not homogenous.
Uh, there are parts of those groups that want
to go fast too, and there are parts that wanna go slow,
and FTO is probably an example of that.
And that's when we, you know, we can end up in litigation.
Um, and, and our, our process for testing mandate,
um, is challenged.
So that's, even though, um, uh,
the crown the government might want go fast,
we are always working with the dynamics
of different views in the groups
we are dealing with as well.
So that's just a, it's another challenge
that our group has to navigate. Do
You have anything you wanted to
Pretty much covered it in terms of we go,
while we may have a desire,
it relies on the desire on the other side too.
Mm. It's, it's a negotiated outcome
that requires both parties to say yes to.
Um, so we are guided by the groups as
to the pace that they do.
And you're not feeling pressure from the government
side to go quicker?
No. I mean, I think that's also been a, a lesson of, uh,
treaty settlements over the years.
Um, previous governments, uh, set timeframes to say, right,
we're gonna complete all historical treaty, uh, claims
by, uh, x date.
Yes. Uh, it then got shifted, got shifted,
and I think that, um, uh, the last, uh, um, couple
of administrations have moved away from that, uh,
to recognize exactly the point that you are, you are making
and to, and to take that out of the equation, frankly.
Uh, of course, uh, um,
I think successive governments have wanted
to complete historical treaty settlements.
That's our goal.
We would like to complete historical treaty settlements,
but we wanna complete them.
Well, they have to be durable.
Uh, the outcomes need to be, um, uh,
what each party, uh, can accept, uh, both for the,
the, the now and the future.
Uh, so they have to be good.
Some, some might argue, sir, sorry. Yeah.
Some might argue that the lack of resource
and investment in the iwi is one of those hurdles to,
that slows the iwi coming to the table to be able to
engage first on an even footing,
and secondly, with something
that might be far more aspirational instead of, um,
confrontational, if you will.
So the question to you is, um, do you think
that there's enough investment in there for iwi to do that?
Um, yeah, we'll leave it at that.
I think, uh, so we have kind funding available.
Uh, it's never going to be, you know, everything
that a group wants in terms of being able
to fund a negotiations process,
but it does provide a platform for them
to be able to engage with the Crown.
And we do support it through, um, regular, regular funding.
But also there's other exceptional circumstances in which,
you know, additional funding is, is
provided TODA to the immediate needs that
that may come up when the original
funding amount wasn't set.
Um, I also think what we've seen is the, uh, to
be slightly is the two disbursements.
The focus is now on building that capability within,
therefore, there is trying to put more of that investment in
for them to be able to engage.
Does that investment include CFRT funding?
Uh, uh Or does it take into account,
It takes into account CFRT funding?
So for those that don't access CFRT
or unable to access CFRT for obvious reasons,
'cause of the S around CFRT, um, are they equitably treated
to those that can access CFRT?
Yes, we have different models for groups
of their CF RT funded or not, or eligible for.
And so the presumption is then with,
and the intention to put it into that upskilling
and that capacity building, if you will, that a same kind
of equitable formula will be applied.
Um, given that resources coming from elsewhere
to support N to D.
I think given the stage that at, in terms of
that mandate development stage and,
and coming together in the forms that we've, for them, uh,
we have a set fair payment funding limits
for negotiations going forward.
Uh, so therefore there is still,
that's still to be occurring.
Okay. Thank you, sir. Um,
Steve? Yep.
Officer got a broader question really about
the impact of, um, what's happened
with the breaking up of and splitting off to,
and, uh, in the context of a, a litany
of legislative actions by this government that are
impacting in its recognition and law,
but also specifically taking actions such as, obviously
around the, and I realize we'll get to that more later,
that are essentially throwing that relationship,
that Crown Maori relationship into disarray
and the impact that your level that you've experienced
as an agency, terms of that action
and how that has a lasting
negative impact on the Crown Maori relationship.
I wonder if you can reflect on that.
Um, well, I, I think it's fair
to say it's been a difficult year for, uh, our organization.
Um, but one thing I know about our people, uh,
is that we are all here for the COPA book.
Uh, that's what our engagement survey tells us.
That's what our employee value proposition survey tells us.
Um, and so, uh, these, uh, decisions to,
uh, break up the organization, um, don't mean
that the Maori crown relationship can't be successfully,
uh, taken forward.
Uh, and certainly, uh, our work in, um,
making sure the transfer of functions to, uh,
happens seamlessly.
Uh, that's our ambition to be able to, uh, ensure
that the people who are going to uni, uh,
are supported by, uh, the systems, uh, all the files
that they've had, uh, access to, uh, the licenses,
to te all those kinds of things that sit
behind a functions transfer.
And then in agreement with TE about how, uh,
we in the future will be able to work together, uh,
to ensure that, that,
that the Maori crown relationship doesn't, uh, uh, suffer,
uh, through, um, uh, through this, this change.
Um, I think that, uh, the while, uh,
uh, and in future, uh, uni have a, uh,
will have a system leadership role
for the Maori crown relationship, it doesn't rest solely,
uh, on us, uh,
or crown agencies have a responsibility
for the Maori crown relationship.
Uh, and it'll be time for them to step up too.
Uh, that's why, uh, the continuation of, uh, the omi,
uh, capability program is really important.
Uh, there are levers that are, uh,
still there in the system, section 14,
that the Public Service Act requires chief executives
to maintain, uh, that capability
to support the ground and the relationship.
Uh, so those are the kinds of things that we, um, uh,
expect as, uh, as this change happens, uh,
in order to, to make it work.
Um, thank you.
We are kind of, um, moving to part three, which is
around the sustaining building
and restoring the Marty Crown relationship.
But, um, no to you can hand over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks.
Um, the commentary just there leads into my question,
which is, we've talked about the
pressures externally from Iwi.
Uh, we're gonna now talk about the pressures internally from
other public sectors.
Mm-Hmm. First question is, is
getting the support from those other agencies, not only
to do their work, but to give better insightful reporting
and context for that is number of us here will have read
annual reports across multiple agencies in our time
as and on these committees.
It doesn't seem to be a stitch at all amongst any
of them yet.
TA's role is very clear in its strategic outcome, uh, about,
uh, supporting the Crown to lift its performance, to work
with Maori to achieve it outcomes, uh,
and being the strategic advisor across
cabinet ministers, et cetera.
So, my, back to my question, do you think it's
good enough the work that's happening across the agencies
with respect to the work that you are required to do?
Um, well, I, I, I think it's still a work in progress.
Um, I, I think, uh, in terms of, in terms of our role,
I can think of, um, things like our chairing
of the Treaty Provisions Oversight Group.
Um, well, that's, uh, cabinet mandated means that, um,
agencies who are considering legislation that refers
to the Treaty of TGI must come, uh, to that group, uh,
and, uh, outline how they, um, intend
to reflect the treaty in the legislation.
Um, at what we notice, uh, there, uh, for agencies
that do come, is that, um, there, there is,
it is variable in terms of, uh, the, the knowledge
and the, uh, the application of some of our other guidance,
uh, like Cabinet Office Circular 19 five on the Treaty
of Ang, uh, which, uh, is designed to help, um,
agencies step through their thinking, uh, about the treaty.
So we do still see, um, as I say, variable, um,
capability, uh, in agencies.
Our job in that group is to be able to support them.
Um, one of our highlights here is, is, uh,
139 cabinet papers commented on, um, uh, that means that,
uh, as we are seeing across government, uh,
different issues being, uh, taken forward,
we have the opportunity to, uh,
to offer a Maori crown relations, Maori rights
and interest perspective into, uh, those, those papers.
Uh, and we're, uh, there are, we see major issues,
uh, like that we course, we are leaning in,
and we're at the forefront of that working with agencies.
And, um, a couple of examples of
that are the fast track approvals bill.
Uh, we led the work on, uh, how a, uh, um,
an appropriate treaty cause should be put into
that legislation, uh,
and in, uh, cyclone Recovery, uh, together with the, um,
CRU Cyclone Recovery Unit.
Um, uh, we let the, uh, uh, UA Maori and,
and pathway, uh, for that work.
So, um, uh, I, I guess about us,
uh, I, I think we've got, uh, again, good, um,
systemic, uh, contribution to make, uh, I think
for other agencies we are seeing, uh, some, uh, advancement
and, and their, their understanding here.
I think it's a long-term, uh, project still, uh,
that we'd need to carry on.
Um, I don't know, Marin, have you got any other reflections,
Um,
um, settle, make commitments part of the office?
Um, yeah, total what Ron has said, I guess, um,
I, I, I agree with that.
Um, we've, we've made some progress.
Uh, agencies are making progress,
but there's still progress to be made.
And I guess some examples I can think of if that's helpful.
Mm-Hmm. Um, the process over the last year of
agencies having to do status updates
of their commitments into hire to mm-Hmm.
Um, they were really intimately getting to,
to getting across their commitments.
And I know that you, you might be thinking, well,
they should know them already, but this was a way of
ensuring that they knew them already
and they knew the status were, um, investigating the status.
So, um, you know, sometimes it's the simple things
that make, make a real difference,
but also the process
of annual reporting on agencies commitments.
This was the first time this year Mm-Hmm.
And, uh, what we heard from the people we talked
to on a more day-to-Day basis, was
it was embedding a real sense
of accountability within the organization.
So I think, you know, like it's,
it's early, not early steps.
We've been in this place in a long time,
but it as a journey.
And, um, we've noticed over the last year, um, market change
Supplementary to that.
Mr. Chair, if I may, um, and I respect
and admire the determination
by TA 50 in this very true process.
The fact remains is that 22 pieces of legislation have
TEI removed from them.
And so my question to you is,
do you feel your voice is heard
and respectfully, with the removal
of those provisions in the legislation,
do you think that'll improve
or, uh, failed in reporting, uh, on outcomes for Maori?
Um, thank you for the question. Um, yes.
Uh, that's been part of the observation
of the treaty provisions oversight group.
That, uh, the, the number of, uh, references to the treaty
and legislation, uh, has for the first time over a number
of years, graphs like this has, uh, has, uh, uh,
decreased, uh, over the recent times, um,
uh, in, in terms of, um, uh, whether that is,
uh, uh, positive
or negative for the Maori crime relationship.
I think, um, oh, sorry.
Your first, first question was, was,
is our advice being listened to?
Um, I can assure you that we have
provided advice on, um, uh, lots of those, uh, pieces of,
of, um, legislation.
Uh, that's our job to provide free and frank advice.
Uh, we aren't the decision makers, uh, that's up
to, uh, government.
Um, I think, uh, some of the, um, proactive really released,
uh, cabinet papers will show, uh,
that tata's advice was contrary to the decisions, uh, made.
Uh, so we continue to provide that advice, uh,
and, um, well, rightly, uh,
the decision makers are there, uh,
through the functioning of our democracy.
Uh, it's their job to make decisions, uh,
our job to provide the advice.
So, uh, I accept all that. Thank you, Warren.
Um, in terms of the, uh, is it positive
or negative for the Maori crown relationship?
Um, I think, uh, that, um, not all, uh, removal,
uh, of treaty causes need be negative
for the Maori crown relationship.
I think it's, uh, absolutely understandable that,
um, uh, uh, given the history, uh,
in relation to, uh, say the, the principles of the Treaty
of tgi, uh, coming through LAN's case, uh, that, uh,
Maori have sought legislative, um, recognition
of the treaty in different, different areas, um, it's a,
a fantastic lever, uh, for, um, reflecting the treaty in,
in a particular place.
Um, what the treaty provisions, uh, oversight group's, uh,
guidance, uh, says to agencies is that, uh,
it's not the only way to recognize, uh, the,
the relationship to recognize treaty rights, uh,
and that, um, uh, we should be exploring, uh, what is the,
the right way in any particular context, uh, to, to do that.
Um, so, uh, I can think in practical contexts, uh,
for service, uh, agencies, uh, that sometimes, uh, the way
that those services are delivered
or the culture that's in the organization may be far more
important than a, um, a cause in a,
in a piece of legislation.
Um, so I, I wouldn't wanna say that, uh,
the removal is always, uh, negative,
and it's not the only way to be able to give effect
to the treaty relationship.
Mm-Hmm. Um, I think, uh, um, that's what
what I say is a, a as, as a, as a public official.
And that's probably where I should stop.
Thank you, Warren. Um, come now to
A new Question from Yes.
If you guys don't mind. Thank you.
Um, congratulations, Anna, for your appointment.
Um, I'm going to just ask
for some specifics, uh, if you don't mind.
Uh, you, um, Zi referred
to the 28.7 million in funding
to support Kuai ANA applicants.
And I note that, um, that the number of, um, of,
of applicants, uh, there was a significant increase when,
uh, when the financial assistance scheme was, um,
changes were made, 2022, 2023.
But can you please for the benefit of us, and, and, um,
and people listening from home, give us more of a kind of,
um, give us more insights into what that support looks like,
maybe some, um, practical examples.
Sure. Um, firstly, uh,
um, I'm Hui, I'm the acting, uh,
Ana, uh, director.
Um, thank you for, uh, your question,
and I can dig a little bit more into, uh, around the,
the situation I think that we faced in, in 23, 24,
and try not get my financial years mixed up.
Um, so, uh, we've talked about
and said in his intro that we, um,
experienced unprecedented dented demand on that scheme.
Um, so since, uh, the schemes inception in 2012,
um, we have an, a yearly appropriation of, um, 12 million.
Um, since, uh, uh, since 2012, we've had an underspend of,
uh, under of 3 million, um, per year, um, up until 22,
or up until this, um, financial, uh,
the 2223 financial year, um,
when we saw a shift in that demand.
So, um, usually we are forecasting on having one hearing,
um, uh, scheduled a year, um, which allows us
to operate within the, uh, the appropriation in 20 to 23.
That shifted quite significantly when we had five, um,
five hearing scheduled.
What that meant, and with the provisions
that we put in place in 2223, was that we brought forward,
um, an urgent review of our, um,
financial assistance scheme.
So, um, uh, applicant groups, uh, are able to apply for,
uh, funding for activity costs, um, in both, uh,
the high court and, uh, in its crown engagement.
Um, activity costs, um, we know relate to administration,
project management, um,
legal costs, so those types of things.
Uh, the other, um, pot, uh, that groups can access, uh,
uh, court hearing, uh, court costs, so court related costs.
Um, we, uh, in 22, 23, um,
we, uh, looked at our scheme.
Um, we wanted to make sure that we firstly had, um,
um, ensured that, uh, applicants had access
to, to that funding.
It was important. Um, it was also, uh, what we also wanted
to achieve was to ensure that there was, um,
equal distribution of that funding.
So, um, sorry, when
You say, sorry, I'm going to interrupt you.
That's okay. Equal distribution in what
Sense? Uh, in the
sense of the, there's fairness for,
for applicants who applied for our scheme.
That's right. So, um, so in the scheme, we did things, uh,
we called them the interim settings
because of the urgency in which we put it in place.
Given the demand on the scheme, uh, uh, applicants are able
to, uh, apply for, um, for funding.
So there are limits to, uh, to the funding
that they can receive, um, for both activity costs
and for court hearings.
Um, there are, um, in the funding scheme,
there are provisions for if applicant groups, um, uh,
attend substantive hearings.
There's a certain amount, I think the cap is 140,000,
for example, um, depending on what, um, the other hearings.
And there are, there are, uh, other levels of funding, um,
within that, um, it was necessary to be able to do that
to ensure that the, the additional funding that, uh,
cabinet agreed to, um, was, uh, it, yeah,
was distributed to the applicants so that, um, the,
the five hearings could, uh, continue.
So that was important
that those five hearings could continue,
but also that we could carry our crown engagements, um,
with applicant groups as well.
So, um, uh, just in terms of just kind of rounding out,
you know, what is available to, uh, applicant groups, um,
we are looking at, uh, um, at, um, consulting
with applicant groups, um, very shortly on, um,
on more long, long term, um, arrangements for the fund.
Um, so it was, I guess outta that, uh, out of
that challenge, there was an opportunity to be able
to do something, um, for, uh, um,
for applicant groups in terms of their access, um,
to both the crown engagement
and to court, um, court letters. Okay.
Thank you. That's, um, that's quite clear.
Um, with your, you've got a sub, you keep going.
Um, I don't have a sub to this.
I just have, um, a question
to something said earlier, but I'm happy.
Okay. Yeah. Supplementary,
It's a sub about funding and support.
Yes. Um, and the settlement support.
Um, so in terms of the, the, the
ANA funding, how will you be able to fund legal claimants
and counsel to prepare for hearings and, um, you know,
and the high court processes,
how much on average does it cost, um,
the hearing cost for Macca?
Mm-Hmm. And for example, in the case of, um,
court proceedings around, uh, hub of, uh,
just completed the process they've been through, now I have
to go back to hearings because of amendments to legislation.
How, how does that impact the ability
to fund all of this stuff?
That's right. So, um, we, uh, so there is funding,
uh, allocator I think is a, is talking about in terms
of those substantive hearings that, um, there are available,
we, um, do recognize
that the legal costs have changed quite significantly over
those years as a result of the, um, of the types
of hearings that have been held.
You know, there's more substantive hearings.
The hearings are longer. Um, we are seeing,
and as you're saying that there are, um, some hearings
that are being, um, rehad, um, in terms of, uh,
the, uh, amendments to section 58.
That is something that we will need to,
and, uh, as, uh, with the Supreme Court judgment
that was issued, uh, uh, um, Monday afternoon, um,
that is something that we will need to look at once we know
what the decision is in terms of the,
that act going forward.
Mm. So, um, we do recognize that that's a challenge for us
and have been working on that the landscape has changed, um,
uh, has changed with the Supreme Court judgment.
So that is something that we will need
to continue to think about.
What are the implications of that judgment going forward?
Yeah. And it just seems like, um, the effect
of the government's knee jerk reaction on the Edwards case,
um, and they should have just bited their time
and waited for the Supreme Court as my view of it,
but that has actually caused more disorder
and disarray and ultimately will cost more for Iwi and Hapu.
Um, and if the government is prepared to step up
and assist with those settlements as they should be,
it's gonna cost the public more as well. Yes,
Yes, yes.
Mihi, you, and those are the
discussions that we've been having.
Okay. Thank you, Steve. Um, Victor
Rela, thank you.
Just, um, Warren, touching on, um,
a comment you made in your introductions.
I mean, know in your first answer about, um,
and, and the Ang Tribunal
and some commentary made there, wha here settlement was, um,
the first settlement that we as a new committee, um, saw.
And it's something that's quite compelling to me personally,
and has, um, been tattooed into my mind.
And I talk to a lot of people about the wha here settlement,
and especially the naysayers that,
you know, why do they get this much?
Why those type of commentary?
Well, if you understand the history, you,
you'd understand why.
So I think the whole telling of the story thing is, um,
is something that we can all work on.
Mm-Hmm. But just with respect to your comments about, um,
the white Tangi tribunal's commentary, um,
about the mandated groups, can you just please, um,
give me a, give us a bit of a deeper insight into
the challenges in the example of wha to here, um,
and, and, and,
and how deeply, um, you guys had to work on those,
uh, for example, that issue of, of, um,
mandated groups and the voting there.
'cause that was a big chunk
of our corridor when we were listening to, um,
to some of the submissions.
So since it was, um, in the last year, um, finalized,
can you please just give us a bit more deeper insight
for us going forward?
Yeah, I'm chuckling now because,
because you're asking me to, uh, Dred back, uh,
while the settlement was done, uh, last year, the,
those issues were, were some years ago.
I'll, I'll do my best. That's okay. Yeah.
And I'm sure, or do you wanna go?
I'll, I'll, I'll cover it off. Thank you.
Um, so, so what we saw with here was,
um, so the Crown has an approach of large network groups,
uh, that brings together sometimes groups
that have an individual identity in themselves separate
from the large natural group.
And so what you saw when here is very strong Hapu identity
that had a different perspective to the wider, um,
so early on in the, in the man.
So following the crown recognition of the mandate,
there was a tribunal urgency application
regarding the crown's recognition of that mandate.
Um, and so therefore, that process happened post the signing
of the agreement principle, but
before we initialed the date of settlement.
Um, and so some of what the tribunal talked about in that,
in that report and findings was how hapu or,
or groupings within the large natural group get
to have their say as that identity.
Um, so a practical difference you saw in the situation,
for example, is when they went through ratification,
they understood where each hapu voted,
not just here as a whole.
And so therefore you also had the level
of support within each hapu
to supplement the information along with the whole of here.
Uh, and so therefore that, that's part
of the submissions that you could feed.
So all the best for,
Um, what, uh, so, um, Greg
and then yourself, actually, I've got a question, um,
just about the, uh, going back
to the performance, um, measures.
So, um, it's about Nu um, yesterday we heard from Nu,
uh, in their annual review that they have some issues around
the restrictions that they have around what they can fund
and what they can use the funds for
and where they can invest
and, um, what the kind of purpose or clarity
or purpose for ung.
So I'm just wondering, firstly, is ti aware of those issues?
And secondly, um, is ti kind working through, um,
those issues and providing that as a package
for the minister to consider?
Uh, so was set up as an investment fund
to build the asset base base for the Crown to use as part
of the treaty settlements with, so
that is the intention in terms of things that can
therefore be used for potential settlement with.
And so I think some of the restrictions they talked about
yesterday was investment outside of Northland, for example.
Um, that then gets into the crown's, overlapping interests,
concerns, and the recognition of when we provide redress
it is in the group's and core area of interest.
And so therefore, that is why the investment outside
of Northland can be considered,
but in specific circumstances rather than as a,
as a board rule, um, in terms
of are we aware of their concerns?
Yes. Um, and they have raised them
with shareholding ministers
who are the decision makers on those, those matters.
Okay. Wonderful parameters. Were pretty specific. Yes.
Yeah. Um, uh, thank you.
We then we'll go to Greg Fleming, and then
Yeah. As it turns out,
chair, that was, yeah, I was,
my primary question was around two nu um,
so this No, no, no.
It's great. It just, this becomes a supplementary question.
I was just wondering, Fern, whether you could, um,
go a bit deeper into the comments that you made
around the role of UA
and potentially the, the shift in focus.
It was just a comment made yesterday that, uh, um, by,
um, by the, by the, by the executive of to Torned that they
recognize that, uh, in two
or three years that their distributions have been more
of the, the kind that you would might expect
to see through au order.
And they're now looking to take a more
of a strategic approach towards investing the capability.
So if you could speak a bit more to that,
but then also speak more to, um, the answer just
before around the potential split focus of
Nu because the, the, the thing that the, uh,
if I heard them correctly, the thing that they were, um,
that the group were, were resting with most yesterday was
that balance between, uh, um, building the kinds
of assets you guys were just describing
and, um, driving the value of the overall fund
and the, and, and, and,
and the fact that those two are not polar opposite,
but they're really not, um, they're not great.
They're not, um, they're not actually complimentary.
So I'm welcome welcoming Lee to the table here
who can answer some of the more detailed ones.
Okay. Um, in terms of the shift of focus of disbursements,
um, current shareholding ministers have been clear
that the focus should be more on the building
that capability and that that's where the focus is.
Now, uh, in terms of a practical difference, I think one
of the concerns they raised was, um,
that disbursements is limited to 10% now.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and practical terms, when you look at dollars,
that's actually more this financial year compared
to previous disbursements.
So that just shows the, the growth
that they are making with the fund.
Um, but in practical terms,
they've actually got more disbursements this year than in
previous years from a, from a dollar perspective.
Okay.
Uh, lovely to see some of you again
and, um, nice to meet those of you that I haven't.
Uh, so shall I start with the portfolio split?
So as Fern said, um, Nu established
three years ago approximately, uh, as a way to try
and resolve the problem the Crown had in the North in terms
of having a lack of, uh, viable commercial assets
that could offer and settlement
and assets would want, is the other thing.
Uh, so the pur the purpose of the fund, uh,
primarily is to acquire commercial assets
that the Crown can offer in treaty settlement negotiations.
So, as Fern said, um, generally, uh,
the Crown will only offer negotiations within a group's area
of an interest that is typically the traditional heartland.
So, uh, it is Northland, there are a range
of views about the extent of that heartland, uh, which I,
which I won't go into.
Uh, but that's why, uh, with the primary portfolio,
the focus is on purchasing assets within, uh, Northland,
uh, regional boundaries.
The, uh, secondary portfolio,
or the other purpose of the fund is
to grow the value of the fund.
Uh, and it's really up to nu how they wish to do
that, and if, if they wish to do that.
And we've certainly seen, uh,
I think a change in direction this calendar year at least,
um, amongst the directors with an increasing focus on that.
So they are able to, uh, acquire assets
outside Northland in rare and exceptional circumstances.
That's the expectation.
Uh, shareholding ministers set for them, uh,
when the fund was established.
And that hasn't changed.
So there's no cap on the proportion of, uh, the capital
that can be used.
Uh, the other point I would make is
that any assets purchased as part of
that secondary portfolio will not be available
as redress for
Ary. Yeah.
Just, um, there was also some comments.
Thank you very much. There, there was also some comments
made yesterday that, uh, in some instances, uh,
in some community settings, it's as though to NU is viewed
as a post settlement entity.
Um, I've been pondering that for the last 24 hours.
Is there the potential that the way that
NU has been established and is now operating
or being expected to operate,
that we're actually creating some fish hooks for the,
for the ongoing settlement process?
Are we actually potentially making things
more difficult for ourselves?
Yeah, so I suppose the first point I would make is
NU is a crown owned company.
Mm-Hmm. Um, established under Schedule four A.
It is not a post settlement governance entity. Yep.
Um, the extent to which it would be able to meet, uh,
post settlement governance entity requirements
hasn't been locked into.
Uh, the other thing, uh, point I would make is that, uh,
just because Pu nu acquires a range of assets,
it's not a given that will want to take, uh, any
of them in settlement.
So it may be that, uh, some of those assets are, uh,
transferred through settlement
and some are not, which I think, you know,
raises questions about, uh, whether
NU could become at some point in the future, um,
either A-P-S-G-E
or a part of a, of an overarching PSGE.
Does that make sense?
Yes, yes, it does. No, IIII, I understand the, the, the,
the, the, the technical aspect of what it is
and isn't, um, I'd be keen to hear your thoughts more about,
I mean, as, as the, the people
who are leading the negotiation, which, which is, uh,
focused on some stage in the future, um, a, um,
a settlement, um, in, in the North,
whether there's the potential for the current structure
of Nu to actually, um, be, be,
be actually a, a stumbling block, um, in, in, in that both,
in both in terms of how it's viewed by some people now.
So whether, whether it's actually complicating, um, um,
negotiations or has the potential to do that.
And then secondly, and you've spoken to this now as well,
whether they're actually the type of assets that it's,
that it's, that it's acquiring are, are not going
to be the kind of assets that the group wants.
And so the acquisition of them then, um, uh,
potentially becomes more of a liability
to, again, to the ultimate name.
Um, I, I can have a go at that.
I mean, I think that, um, the whole reason that
Nu was created and it is, uh, innovative,
that's not something that we've done, uh,
in other settlements Yeah.
Is to recognize that, um, gee, uh, um, it's taking us a, a,
a wee while to get NHI to the table.
Yeah. Um, and so when you might've heard a comment,
the way I've always understood the comment about Tu Puna
who acting a little like a PSG, is that it's been part
of the, uh, I guess there's some of the thinking to, uh, act
as, uh, a kind of a, a demonstration of the benefits
of settlement, uh, that if this right, uh,
crown owned company currently crown controlled and
and directed was your, uh,
post settlement mm-hmm.
Asset to direct
and do with, uh, as you wished, then
that would be a good thing for, uh, so that's,
that's the sense in which, uh, I've understood to people
to be considered as A-P-S-G-A demonstrator of the benefits
of settlement, uh, and
therefore, um, in the context of, uh, trying to get
to negotiations with Pui, uh,
and incentive to, to get to negotiations.
Uh, so in that sense, it's a, um, uh, I think it's firmly a,
a part of the crown's, uh, strategy, uh, to get
to the negotiating table.
Just one sub on that from me, if I can.
'cause it is, um, ed with me for the last 24 hours as well.
Um, 'cause they talked about if I could just double the fund
from one 50 to 300, um, you know, often the incentive
to settle is the opportunity cost of not settling in terms
of the, the money you could have got.
So I respect the, the two purposes.
It's just, um, you know, wherever they invest,
they can always liquidate the assets
even if they're not gonna be used in the settlement.
So I just wondered if Tata Fis considered that is, um,
that, that actually cash and cash
and bankers far more of a purpose for settlement than,
um, other physical
Assets? Uh,
yeah. Uh, uh, I mean there, there's always the, the case
that, uh, as Mr. Fleming was pointing out, that, uh, if,
if the assets that two, two nu holds at the stage
that we get to, uh, negotiations, uh, some, some
or, uh, some of those assets may not be
attractive for settlement.
So, uh, them being able to realize those assets, uh, uh,
to cash is, is, is always, uh, an option.
Mm-Hmm. Um, uh,
but in, in terms of whether, uh, doing nothing, uh, compared
to, uh, demonstrating a commitment to npu
and to negotiations, that's essentially the, um, uh, the,
uh, decision that was, uh, uh, in front
of cabinet when Tupu was, was created.
Uh, with, with all of those, um, uh, all of that context
around well, uh, how can we, uh, get towards
that negotiation space?
How can we drive that? How can we show a commitment to,
how can we address the reality that everybody understands
that there aren't a lot of crown assets in the North
that might be valuable?
Uh, so, you know, uh,
whether there's further investment in TU ton
or not will be, uh, for the government to, to assess, uh,
um, it's still got a little way
to go to this that's current.
Thank you. Um, supplementary or no?
Um, so, well mine
Might be, I don't know, are we delving into a conversation
about, you know, per settlement specifically?
Yeah, no problem. Yeah, no.
Um, we are, we're now kind of in between part four
and part five of the agenda.
So, yeah, go ahead. So new primary in
It's about, um, the large natural groupings treatment of,
you know, of PU
and the sense that that's been strongly opposed.
And will you be pushing, uh,
pu towards that a settlement that doesn't allow Habu
settlements and the recognition
of habu never having seated sovereignty?
Um, how, this is a bigger question I sent,
uh, I in a sense,
but it's a question that's specifically we need to deal,
you need to deal with hook pui is, um,
how can we meaningfully reconcile, um,
the challenges of breaches
if we are not in our maturity as a crown able
to acknowledge that Maori never set its sovereignty
on a hapu level and on a countrywide level?
That's a meta question, I suppose,
but back to this also the specifics of, well,
You've got, got two parts to that one.
So I might turn to my colleagues on the, um,
LNG part large natural group.
Uh,
Yeah. First. Yeah.
First. Yeah, sure.
Okay. Uh, so in 2019,
the Crown dis continued its recognition of the KU mandate.
So that was the one mandate for all of mabu
and sought, uh, mandate proposals from hapu groupings.
There were no parameters placed on
how groupings could come together, uh, who they worked with.
Uh, we left that up to them.
Uh, as a result, uh, of that work, uh,
three groupings have come forward and been confirmed
and are now formally undertaking mandate work.
So we've got, uh, uh,
and a grouping in the Bay of Violence, uh,
groups in other areas generally regional areas
are doing some work.
It's, it's not, um, at the same point in the mandate process
as, as those three groups, uh, what we've seen,
uh, this year is, uh, our minister has, uh, been very clear
with his preferences, uh, for larger groupings forming
for men dating purposes.
Um, let me be clear, we are not going back to one, uh,
large natural group, uh, in the, in the north for na.
Um, I think we've all seen, uh, how, uh,
that didn't reflect, uh, dynamics on the ground, uh,
and the, uh, strong, uh, hapu,
uh, centric nature of na.
And that's very Wellington speak, I'm aware.
Uh, so he has, uh, as I said, a strong preference
for larger groupings, uh, what that number looks like.
He wants it to be workable.
Uh, what we won't be doing, um, is forcing anyone
to the negotiation table, uh,
but I guess coming together, uh, working
with those groups in a way that works for them.
Uh, okay. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll try and be careful. No, excepting,
I'm rather conflicted here.
My first question, uh, is to, uh, whether
or not the, in the five years
of its existence has done any auditing on the resource
and money spent in progressing in
settlement question?
Yes, we have, Uh,
We, we frequently, oh, I a, um,
about expenditure on NG settlement
and have been for, um, many years.
Yeah. And so can, for the benefit
of the committee give any kind of ballpark figures, um, both
that, that's quantified
and that which is in terms of the effort, energy,
and work that's undertaken by,
Yeah. So ballpark,
including the, um, the work
that was undertaken in relation to the mandate up until now,
talking around $12 million.
But that is very top of my head.
Um, my next question is,
touches part on my colleague's question about, uh,
and the claim,
which established at least that did not see sovereignty.
What impact has that had
or influence has that had on the way that you've been able
to progress, uh, the settlement, uh, in light of
what seems to be, uh, a pension, if you will, for the crown
to continue to follow down its normal path
that it does on all settlements?
Yeah. So the Crown has acknowledged that finding
that when Narang signed, um,
they didn't see their sovereignty.
Uh, we have, however, consistently said that
that discussion is a matter for negotiations.
Um, and other than the various public statements
that have been made, um, that that's where we want
to have that conversation.
Very good. Yeah, there are, there are some groups who,
uh, have been equally clear that they require the Crown
to accept that before they will commence mandate work,
and that's their prerogative to do so.
Uh, others are comfortable having that conversation, uh,
when we're in formal negotiations.
Okay. Mr. Chair, my final question is part of
what was described in the uni discussion about
overlapping interests.
And we've already touched on the
overlapping interests of Hapu within.
My question though is for a view of, so we know
that ua, uh, have had settlements go through,
but we also know that UA is aka papa is intertwined
and is one and part of others.
My question to you is, with respect to the role
that Muy UA have played through their settlement,
what consideration is ti
or the settlement process, uh, undertaking with trying
to eliminate or account for the overlap
of URI UA settlement and its potential
or possible impact on? Hmm.
Um, thank you for the question.
So we are very alive, um, to
the nature and extent of overlapping interests
or what working in the north, more commonly referred to
as shared interests in many circumstances.
Um, the benefit I suppose, of having, uh, undertaken
or completed negotiations and settlements with most,
but not all, uh, UA groups, uh, is that, uh,
we have built up a lot of knowledge about the nature
and extent of their interests, um, through the settlement.
There is an obligation in their deed of settlement for them
to participate in any negotiations around Ana Harbor.
Um, equally, uh, down the Western seaboard, uh,
ua, not saying necessarily, um,
but sweeping round to
very aware of their interests, not as aware, obviously,
of the groups themselves.
Um, but then we've also got the lessons we've learned, uh,
through multiple other settlements, uh,
where overlapping interests have become
particularly contentious.
Uh, very, uh, keen to, uh, not repeat, um,
some of the mistakes of the past, um, particularly not
to worsen relationships, um, within, in between Hapu
and Iwi, um, as you raised
before, um, that wonderful day yesterday,
um, tribute to here for their commitment, um,
and their role as kaki of that part on behalf of,
um, but in doing so, they have acknowledged the wide,
the wider interest in associations of, in particular,
hapu in their par.
Um, so the work which they lead actually in relation
to shared interests, um, could, if it works elsewhere,
could be a bit of a template.
Um, don't, don't really like describing relationships like
that, um, but it is an approach that worked well.
Um, largely I think due to the, um, the personalities
and the standing and integrity, um, of, um,
If I can Mr. Chair,
um, and acknowledging my bias
at the battle of we Allies attacked
ua, so on record that while NATO were being slaughtered,
uh, and as the leader of the Ally forces,
we were keen to continue to decimate na uh,
it was ti who said ti no more
and put his kahu over ATU to protect them
and cemented that with the gifting of his nephew to live
amongst the people of ATU
and has now established in the northern place called,
and I need that on notice.
And it's not new,
it's throughout the entire tribunal hearings,
but it comes to my question about TU and the expression of,
and it's traditional context
and how PU are able to, if they are able to express their
through this process, which continues to be fraught,
given, and, and,
and with all due respect, the word that we used, it wasn't,
uh, intentional,
but it is certainly the view of many that it is a template
and it doesn't work, uh, across his conflicting interests.
So I'll leave it at this. Mm-Hmm. We good?
We've got a question from Hannah Raffa Clark.
Mr.
Um, my question is also a bit of a bias question,
but, um, for us in, we're coming up
to our 30 year anniversary of our 20 settlement next year,
and I can kind of just imagine all of the, over
that 30 year time span, the amount of do's
and don'ts we have learn and kind
of the asset base we've learned that has worked for our iwi
and hasn't worked for our iwi.
So I'm just kind of wondering if,
and also the many settlements that came in that process, um,
if there's a bit of a database
or a hoo that is of the,
uh, PhDs that have already happened in order to help
the treaty settlements that are still left over
that are way more complex
and kind of just, I'm kind of also saying this as like,
how can both of my iwis help each other,
but they're also two completely different dynamics around,
um, we had no option
but to have a blanket approach
with the workers of primary settlement.
Um, and if you didn't do the settlement, you got left out.
Uh, whereas NG won, obviously.
So just kind of wondering if there's that, um,
That database there or that
or, uh, we, we are allowed to kind
of communicate with each other.
Um, what we have found is groups do talk to each other
Naturally, naturally.
Yeah. Um, they have their own relationships
and they have their own knowledge connections Yeah.
To, to share some of that knowledge.
Um, from an internal crowd perspective,
we also do that in our own way.
Gotcha. Um, so if we think about, and,
and the knowledge that sits behind that with,
quite often the people that are in that part of our office,
um, are often providing that guidance to us.
And that lessons learned about ensuring that the settlements
that we do now are durable, um,
because they can see, excuse me,
they have more firsthand experience of Yeah.
Where the pitfalls are, you know, five, 10,
sometimes 30 years post settlements, that we can try
and address those things
as we going through the process now. Um,
Cool.
There's a good example there, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I can confirm, um,
um, have gone down to why, to look at the model,
uh, to look for its strengths and its, and its challenges.
I won't say weaknesses, challenges.
Um, the only advice that I get
to give my relations is there are many ways to skin a cat.
Uh, and Y Kato is a great example.
There are other really good examples of done
around the country, which, if I may, Mr.
Chair brings me to a ary question.
Um, uh, uh, there's support to bring claimants
and to bring, uh, iwi who wish to sit on to the table.
Is there any, has there been any support
and would there be support for those, uh, marketing
to engage in such a way to continue
and progress that month from 10 50, I should say,
support in terms of meaningful and financial,
Uh, in terms of those post settlement lessons?
Oh, yeah. Bringing, bringing that ability
or creating a Tata, if you will, to allow them to have
that conversation and interaction.
Shall I start? Sure.
I, I think the difficulty for us at this point
is the transfer of functions to, Hmm.
Um, so what, what we see is that
that post experience is part of the functions
that is moving to clinic orbit.
So in terms of that connection,
it's not, and it's current. Current. Well,
Good. So we
we're nearly at that point of, um,
transitioning in the agenda.
But, um, uh, I had a question kind of related to this
around, uh, and it goes back to, I guess, um,
my colleague was talking about with wha Toya.
'cause we found that the, the division in
that settlement was, um, uh, probably one
of the more divisive settlements that we've, we,
I've, I've been involved with.
And it's brought us to a discussion around in terms
of enduring settlements, um, what happens post settlement
for those, um, divisive, you know, uh,
iwi or hapu that are displaying, um, uh,
and, and are opposed to the settlement.
Um, so, um, we've had discussions with Lil in the past
around this, but is thinking about
or, um, have, have done
research around, uh, what are the factors that lead to
those that oppose maybe coming in
and being okay post settlement.
Um, or I don't know if I'm explaining myself well,
but, um, yeah, I guess we will want these to be enduring.
So I'm keen to understand what are the factors that lead
to those that oppose a settlement to be included so
that actually they're enduring in the future.
I have this, uh, somewhat philosophical response
and that, um, relationships evolve and change over time.
There will be moments in those relationships
that are flash points, and sometimes a treaty settlement
or stages of a treaty settlement are those flash
points for relationships.
Um, and the post settlement space can be a,
a environment where the crown flashpoints are removed
from that equation, and therefore groups can engage,
or, you know, parties within a a a group can engage in a way
that is right for them.
Um, sometimes that happens through the settlement processes,
and sometimes we'll see delays
because they're focusing on those internal conversations.
Um, but that's my sort of philosophical things,
is those relationships go through cycles
and are responding to the
environments with which they're in.
And it depends too, like the nature of that settle. Yeah.
Why, for example, it's very different to the other ones. Mm.
Which enabled the likes
of others within wa others Mm.
To continue to progress their settlement,
but as a collective, they see themselves, uh, unified,
um, but independent.
Mm. Which I think is a very good way.
If I can just supplementary Mr.
Chair to your settle, uh, to your question, with respect to,
uh, to, and the challenge that that has been,
uh, and this question applies across all of the settlements
and the process through, um, the identified deed
of agreements that you've already entered into over the
last 12 months.
Is there a process, uh, for
the other fatigue itself, uh,
while acknowledging they have an ongoing piece
of work within
and beyond settlement to do this kind of, uh,
want to use the word ho ho actually carrying the burden?
I wonder just benefit of staff
and the team that carry that burden, whether
or not you have this, uh, specific process that allows them
to continue to feel safe.
I have to continue to support them because it is heavy.
It's heavy, and, and you are at the front line.
We see the legislation at the end and,
and all through the committee.
I just wondered if there's a process either.
I'm not too sure what that,
Um,
Um, I have the privilege of being able to be
somewhat of, um, to be able to,
to be able to bring understanding in space
of which we'll talk about a little bit later on, um,
to bring, to have a deeper understanding about how we bring
who we are into the MAI that we do,
and understanding the aspects of Hmm.
So that when we do our duties in the mahi that we do, uh,
we look after ourselves so that we can still be good
for our, when we return home.
Uh, so part of that, like the way of creating a pathway
for us to be able to deliver on our responsibilities as,
but to also ourselves,
to put ourselves in some aspects to be able to return home
and be people again.
Um, so we have those in place sometimes.
Um, it varies. The need varies based on the mahi that we do.
It can be as simple as a,
or it can be finding a space to actually
and bring different elements like y um,
and other, uh, practices that we have.
So yes, we do have, um, t in place, uh, to be able
to look after ourselves in the mahi that we do,
and we try to demonstrate some of that across the board
as well when we have our engagements with other agencies.
Yeah. Uh, uh, I've got a primary, yeah.
New primary. Yes. Yep. Perfect. To talk.
Thank you very much. That's, um,
Sorry, Sorry, sorry.
I don't have my behind my nephew,
but I, I do feel the need to say something here.
Um, in response to your path, I, you know, I used
to wonder why there were very few Maori, um,
involved in the settlement space.
And it wasn't a space that I,
that I was keen on being part of.
And, um, your question, you have to be extremely resilient,
um, to operate in this, this space.
It's not an easy space.
Um, so I did want to, uh, take the opportunity, um,
to share that with you,
but also to pay tribute to those, um, that have worked
for decades in this space.
It is a thankless space.
You know, every single milestone, every single ceremony
that I've been, um, part of it's moved me.
And, um, you know, you see that in the staff of
every single day.
I've been in awe of the expertise of the commitment.
So I just thought I wanted to take the opportunity
to share that with you.
Yeah. And sorry for rude to interrupt you.
I did try to put my hand up earlier,
but no one saw me. Oh, sorry.
Sorry. Till, that's my fault.
But thank you for sharing your, um, your views.
I really appreciate it. Uh, over to
You p Kura, and thank you, auntie.
I think they've taken our f as me being your proxy,
but, uh, thank you for your
ana thank you for the work you do.
I think it's hugely important.
My question, uh, comes back
to the segue into the transition.
Yes. Uh, and,
and the, uh, scope, uh, of, um, the now
and the future of ti.
I wondered if it, if, uh,
because we've touched on bits of it, if we can, Mr.
Chair Yeah. Allow just a little bit of commentary
to open up this, and by that I mean
the experience over the past 12 months since the
reset to Rescope.
Uh, and that will in turn help us to understand
and perhaps even, uh, come up with more questions about how
that's worked and, and,
and how this continues
to work now in its future. Uh,
Been just a journey over the, the last 12 months.
Um, it has been, uh, um, funny old year, uh,
at the start of the year, uh, we were, uh, producing
for you, uh, our, uh, performance framework.
Uh, and you'll see in that framework, um, some of the,
uh, I think some of the horizon ambition that we were trying
to push into, uh, our organization.
Uh, so for instance, uh, the, the, uh,
the stuff in here about Vision 2040, uh, really is about
how do we, uh, get successfully to 2040, uh,
where this country can celebrate, uh,
the Maori crown relationship.
Uh, we're putting that into our, uh, this is where we want
to take the organization and the country.
Um, uh, I, I think we, we began a,
an organizational change process to, uh, reflect, uh, that,
uh, framework, what, what was the structures
that we would need with Intel 50 to, uh, take that forward.
Um, that, uh, occurred over, uh, July and August.
We got to the point of, um, consultation being closed, uh,
and we were up to a, a decision space.
Uh, when, um, we were advised that Capt had taken,
um, decisions to, uh, clarify the functions between, uh,
and, uh, in support of the, um, minister,
uh, minister's vision for, uh, uh, Maori development
and the Maori craft relationship, um, that meant we put a,
a stop to that change proposal.
Uh, and I, I note that here
because, um, it's an indicator for, um,
our, our staff
and our organization of, uh, I guess the length of time
in which there's been a, uh, some uncertainty about the, uh,
about where we are going, uh,
and what is the scope of, of our work.
Um, the, the cabinet decisions were in principle decisions,
uh, with, uh, some delegation to, uh, uh, subset
of ministers to, to finalize those, those decisions, uh,
after, uh, some due diligence work, uh, and
after some, uh, engagement with, uh, with Iwi Maori, uh, on,
on the ideas, um, ministers took those decisions.
Uh, then, um, in October, October, thank you,
uh, in October, uh, which has then led to, um, uh,
a consultation with our staff, uh, on two aspects.
One, the transfer of functions to uni, uh,
and two, uh, the redesign of te as a consequence.
Um, that consultation document, um,
consultation period ended on Friday.
Uh, and we hope to be able to make, uh, decisions, uh,
uh, uh, by Thursday the 12th of December.
Uh, the idea around that is that, um, given the length
of time that our staff have been, um, wondering
what the future holds, uh, decisions, uh,
before Christmas will, uh, at least give them a picture of
what, uh, next year looks like.
Um, our direction is to implement the transfer of functions
by the end of February, uh, before the 1st of March.
Uh, and so we're looking at an implementation date of 24
February, um, that allows 10 50 to, uh, uh,
uh, support, uh, ang commemorations, uh,
but then, um, that that's when the transfer would happen
And, and what are the transfer actions?
So what is moving to what is staying
Thing? Thank you for that supplementary
from the member next to me.
Uh, I think the easiest way to describe it is that, uh, um,
remaining will be focused on treaty settlements and ANA
and everything else that we do, the partnerships ang uh, so
that's, uh, um, post settlement, uh, relationships.
It's the, um, uh, kahu ana, uh, it's
for, uh, public sector capability.
Uh, it's the, um, uh, running of, uh, of, of events.
Uh, all, all of those things will become, uh,
the responsibility of, uh, critical, uh, supplementary.
Thank you, uh, through you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and thank you for that.
I think that's a helpful timeline as well
as some good perspective on, on the why.
My question to you is, one question was two views,
and that is the consultation that was undertaken
through this process over the last 12 months, both
externally and internally.
And, um, well, I accept this might be tricky.
What was some of that direct feedback with respect
to the proposed changes?
Um, I, I dunno that I can answer that one directly, uh,
because, um, uh, I mean, the,
the cabinet decisions, uh, were advised to us, uh,
that wasn't, uh, something that we were, um, proposing, uh,
or, uh, seeking, seeking views on.
Um, and in terms of the, uh, subsequent consultation, uh,
that, uh, minister aka, uh, ran, uh, again,
were simply advised that the, um, the engagement
that he had was, uh, to his, his satisfaction, uh,
and that the, the decisions
therefore, uh, were confirmed, uh,
and that it was then our, our role to implement, uh,
those decisions, um,
supplementary from Steve Abel.
Yeah. Further to that, I wonder if you can, um,
comment in, in July, the Anderson said that the benefits
of reducing the overlap between TAFE
and KOURI were overstated the warn
that the proposal would risk government failure
to achieve its treaty settlements
and ANA program by separating implementation
from negotiation.
I wonder if you can comment on whether you agree with that,
Uh, that, that was certainly the, uh, perspective, um,
offered in the, uh, in the thought process
that ministers were, were going through.
Um, that was before, uh, decisions were taken.
Uh, and I think it's our, uh, our role now to, as I was,
uh, saying earlier, uh, now that decisions have been taken
and the, the transfer of functions will happen, uh,
that we need to make the best that we can to ensure, uh,
that the, uh, the prospect of breakdown between,
uh, completing a treaty settlement
and then having an effective post settlement relationship,
uh, is one that we can, uh, bridge, uh, between TI
and, uh, uni corti, uh,
and that they, uh, the tip uni, uh, can bring to bear,
uh, some of the, the assets they have, uh,
the relationships they have, the regional network
that they have, uh, that may be able to, um, uh, take,
uh, the challenges that will be, uh, now on their plate
and turn them into opportunities. Questions. I've
Got supple on that of Sorts.
Supplementary, have you? Good. We'll go after the break.
Yeah. But I've got some, um,
Broader questions Around the other
Settlement. We,
we, we attend that in
The, in after the, There's no break in the session.
So do you have a new question or a supplementary
Oh, sorry. I thought there was a
break at 10 o'clock. 10 minutes. Was
He? Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Sorry.
Um, okay. So we're ran running over.
Do, do, do we want a break
or, uh, do we,
I guess we've got a scheduled break, so Yes, please.
Let's, let's, um, let's just pause for 10 minutes,
and that's a great segue from past
and present into the future.
Um, so we will just pause the live stream.
Sorry, Toi, we're gonna pause you for 10 minutes
and we'll come back at, um, let's just say
10 past quarter.
Past quarter past. Wonderful. Yeah, thank you.
Great evening.
And, um, we're coming to the last part
of the structured agenda, so focused on the future of,
and any other lingering matters
that members wish to discuss.
So we've got an hour
and 20 minutes, um,
really enjoying the quarter all with you today.
So, uh, thank you.
And first question up from Greg Fleming, then.
Oh, um,
did you have a sub I up on the end of the last session?
It was about, um, the, the broader impact
of the diminished workforce and Tara Fit,
and how that impacts your ability to do the work.
You know,
Excuse me, I take some penadol.
Um, uh, we, we will need to look at our work program,
um, once this transfer of functions, uh, is complete, uh,
mean currently we remain focused on, uh, what our,
uh, collective minister's priorities.
We're still, uh, responsible for all these things until, um,
until end of February.
Yes. Uh, so, uh, we're doing advantages to,
um, advance those.
Um, but I think it's, uh, fair to say that, uh, uh,
with a reduced, uh, number of staff, we will need to, uh,
uh, tailor our work program to, to
what it is that we can achieve.
Um, but risks
and opportunities is, is on the agenda, I guess.
Uh, one of the opportunities, uh, out of prefer
to call it an opportunity, uh, out, out of that is for us
to, um, uh, look at, uh, uh, different ways
that we might be able to work.
Um, uh, I didn't agree with, uh, your colleagues, uh,
um, um, uh, description of the treaty settlement, uh,
process as a template.
Uh, I, I understand I love it, understand what, um,
what, what he might have meant.
But, you know, every treaty settlement is different, uh,
and we will need for the ones that we have in front
of us to find innovation.
Uh, and the way that, the way that we, we go ahead.
Uh, and there's, um, you know, it'll be a chance for us
to look at, uh, the way that we work, um, uh, uh,
with a lesser capacity, uh, hopefully to find, um,
smarter ways of working.
But those are some of the challenges that are,
that are ahead of us too.
Um,
Uh, yes, David Mcle.
Thank you. Um, so with the, um,
the durability of settlements, what, what do you see,
or at this time as being the most significant risk, um,
with regards to the enduring nature of the,
From the, the, the transfer of functions?
Well, it is more from your experience.
I mean, you are, it has been today.
So just in, in a general sense,
Um, Gilda can, is that picking me up?
Um, thanks for the question.
Oh, it's, um, the, uh,
it's hard to pinpoint one thing, um,
but I think getting the basics right, I said that
before, is really important.
Understanding your commitments, making sure
that the delivery of commitments from, um, the Crown.
There's 2028 in the next, um, reporting year,
28 core crown agencies with responsibilities, um,
commitments rest across local government
and non-core crown agencies as, as well, as well
as post settlement governance entities.
So it's quite, um, a lot of, um, parties
involved in any one settlement.
So ensuring that everyone knows how
to deliver their commitments is really important.
Um, and having and having it properly resourced.
Um, we find in terms of the nature of settlements
where there's complexity that's, um, not well understood,
that creates all right risks.
So having, um, having commitments redress that's really, um,
clearly able to be in implemented, um, able
to be picked up by a new person in an
organization and implemented.
That's really, really helpful,
Mate. How do you monitor
the, um, entities, uh, that are not part
of, uh, the government itself?
So you've, you've got local
government, you've got other, yeah.
How do you monitor that? How do you
identify the success of that?
Yeah, it's a, it is a really good question
because our focus at the moment has been in terms
of our system lead role in, um, oversight
of treaty settlements has been through to hire to, um,
and, uh, and requiring agencies to, uh, requiring call crown
to keep track of the status of commitments
and report on, on, on the annual report to HA is available
to all agencies with commitments.
So they can use it for visibility,
but they're not all required to, um, provide,
um, updates on that.
Um, so we, for those local government, for non-core Crown,
how we operate is more of a, um, uh,
it's a by escalation.
So a matter is brought to our attention.
That's how it's managed.
And my last supplement on this line of questioning, so in
identify, um, a non brown entity not delivering on a,
on a, a, a treaty settlement Yeah.
Which is in an act similar, what Yeah.
Uh, what are the,
what's the process Yeah. To bring them into
Life? Um, we still,
uh, would still, um, work.
Firstly, we need to understand
what the nature of the issue is.
It's really important too,
because, um, first blush can often look quite different once
you dig into what's actually going on.
So it's really important to talk to all relevant parties,
um, and we would, uh, uh, undertake to meet face to face
and work through what, what's been going on
and how can that be, um, worked through
and if necessary, try
and work through escalating, if that's required.
So it depends on the nature of the issue.
Can I just add to that, um, Marion, so, and,
and Warren might add to this as well, so
s also had a role in, um, providing advice on, uh,
major public policy matters.
So form the, uh, reform of the RMA, um,
the water services three waters.
So there are, there are implications, potential implications
and development of that policy for treaty settlements
and how they endure, how they endure and are protected.
Um, so that's been part of our, I guess that's a,
that's another way definitely that, um, risks, uh, come
to our teacher, or you might
talk about that more about that. Well,
I had a, a different angle.
We can leave to the committee to pick 'em up if they're, um,
my, my angle was really on, um, in terms of, uh, durability
of settlements is, is, uh, how the relationship is,
is practiced, uh, post, post settlement.
Um, and the whole idea is to, uh, under our framework is
to restore the relationship, acknowledge, uh, a d uh,
difficult past or breaches of the, the treat, uh, to get
to a point where a settlement can be reached.
Um, but that's not the end of it.
It is about the ongoing relationship there
and how we conduct the relationship, uh, between, um,
the we group and, and the crowd.
And I think that, um, as the commitment to the relationship,
I think is, uh, part of making settlements endure,
I think about, um, uh, the two way settlement,
uh, post settlement.
I think it's fair to say they've had, uh, a number of, uh,
uh, issues that, uh, have come up, um, uh, initially with,
um, with Doc and, uh, in relation to Toyota, uh,
that was able to be, uh, sorted through, uh,
or more recently, um, the creation of a, a sea board to work
with, uh, uh, has been tremendously successful.
And, um, uh, acknowledging the relationship that came out
of the settlement and preserving that
and taking that relationship forward rather than saying,
well, you know, we've done settlement.
That's, uh, if there are problems with it, then, um, um, uh,
they, they don't need to be, need to be fixed.
Well, uh, um, the commitment to
that relationship ongoing has been really important, uh,
to the durability of that,
of inspired.
I'll just come to, um, Greg Fleming,
'cause he's been holding on since
before the break, so I'll come back to
You. Um,
so just came to, we've, we had a good dive around,
um, and by general estimates, uh, what sort
of maybe 50 settlements approximately that we're looking at,
um, settle, settle in the coming years.
Um, what are the other, um, what are the other major, um,
challenges that you see in that space?
Um, and is it,
I know we've spoken about this before, actually.
We raised this in, within our debrief
with Lil about actually this committee getting, getting a,
um, a view, uh, of, of those, of, of, of the 50
so that we can sort of track with them in the coming years.
Well, at, at least on that last, I think we've
provided the, um, the, I think we had, uh,
we do a quarterly report, um, that is published.
It's on, on our website,
and it gives you, uh, the, uh, the map of, uh, it shows
where settlements, uh, have been completed
and where, uh, they are, um, yet to, uh, areas
that are yet to settle, right.
As all of the groups, uh, we've, uh, negotiated
with listed, uh, behind that.
Forgive me if that hasn't come to, no, I don't think
We received, I haven't seen that. That'd be amazing.
Okay. But then can we get that, we'll make sure
that we, we provide that to you.
Um, to your first question, the remaining challenges,
And I think one, are the things that have been the nature
of the question so far.
It's, it's the readiness of the groups to engage.
So, for example, along the coast groups have focused on
engaging in the district inquiry
through the waiting in tribunal first.
Um, so they're at that stage of, of their process
and their journey in terms of,
then the next focus would be coming into mandate
conversations and how do they configure themselves?
What does that representation look like?
Um, and so therefore, it's like going at their pace and,
and responding to that, that event, um,
overlapping interest is, is always a, a challenge.
And, and there's been that,
that change in dynamic in the last 30 years where now the,
the majority are settled.
So therefore the engagement with a settling group
with their neighbors being settled is a different nature
of conversation compared to nobody being settled.
Um, and before the different stages
and the different focus of those groups being in that, in
that settled mindset rather than in the yet to settle.
Mm-Hmm. Um,
and then there's a lot of, uh, the ever evolving landscape.
Um, so while we have, uh, precedences
and examples of, of treaty settlement redress,
Lauren's talked about innovation, and,
and that is in a way also responding
to our legislative environment.
Mm-Hmm. Um, you know, with r reforms and things like that.
Then we look at whether or not it needs to be
banks in our areas as well, in terms of how
to deliver on aspirations.
I think, um, I mean, some of the other, uh,
challenges are, uh, are probably good ones.
Uh, there was a conversation earlier around what are yet
to settle groups learning from settled groups.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, some of that is, um, a, a greater familiarity
with, uh, the, the treaty settlement process, uh,
raised desperation.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, as well, uh, for, for what might be done
through a treaty settlement.
Uh, and those will be challenges for, uh, for the Crown
to respond to, um, with,
with settlements still to come. Um,
Can I add one? Um,
it's been mentioned, um, personalities,
so I think Lee mentioned it, you know,
she gave us an example of how personalities, uh, helped us
to get out the line on way.
So that's something, I mean, we won't give you examples,
but you can probably imagine Yeah.
Supplementary from.
Yeah. Um, I'm interested to understand, uh,
like we've been talking about Ton
and it serves a number of purposes.
One of them is actually serving the purpose of in, well,
not necessarily incentivizing,
but giving optics on potentially what this could be.
As I said, you understand that model is being used in,
in other cases, I'm not wrong.
I think Na might have had a, had a a, a payment up front.
There's got get some things going prior.
So how do you identify a particular group that potentially
that model might actually work in that case?
Um, it's engagement with them in terms of
that relationship, and it can be
the opportunities that arise.
So on a smaller scale, sometimes groups will come
to us about a property that's privately owned, uh, and
therefore say, this is of importance to us.
Uh, and then that helps to build the relationship with them
and identify whether or not that is an opportunity with,
which would provide an incentive for.
So it's, it's initiated from them as a discussion,
can we potentially do something?
'cause it starts from their side rather than
you proactively saying,
I think it depends on what the opportunity is in front.
Um, you know, if it's something that's happening internal
to the Crown that we might go, actually,
here's a hook in there.
We might do that and it can work both way.
Thank You. Matthew. You might have been, if I,
I might have misunderstood, but you may have been talking
about on account payments, uh, for, uh,
with different groups who are yet to settle,
but maybe close to settling.
And there may be an opportunity, uh, that has come up
that they would like to, uh, invest in.
Uh, that there, there is opportunity to have conversations
with the Crown about an advance on, uh, settlement redress.
Yep. That's on account essentially is, uh,
but it is part of the, the redress nonetheless.
Uh, and at least on the, the Crown side for, uh,
consideration for those things really is about, um, uh, uh,
certainty, uh, towards settlement.
The degree of, uh, confidence that we will reach settlement.
Uh, the, um, I, I guess the, the level of, of the investment
that the, uh, the group may be, uh, seeking compared
to their settlement redress,
all those kinds of factors, they're
Not always guaranteed. Right.
You might have look at Stony Creek, uh, white
to example, why not, and not quite across.
Um, thank you. We go now to Steve Abel. Yeah, thank you.
Um, so a lot of the language that you were using in, in
that last series of answers was around enduring settlements,
you know, ongoing relationships.
And you spoke in the last session about, um, sort of,
I don't think you use the term evolving,
but you talk about the sort of nature
of relationships going through different stages.
How does that now reconcile with this idea of a full
and final pillar as the language that is used
and how much is that onset, which really seems
to contradict the idea of enduring and ongoing.
Um, how does that get in the way of Iwi who would like
to settle in some form, but the idea of it being full
or final, or a failing to acknowledge the non seating
of sovereignty is, is a primary barrier
to that settlement process.
Uh, in terms of settlements being full
and final, they are full
and the final settlement of their historical claims.
So pre 1992 claims against the Crown.
So I think that is a, a marker.
Their relationship with the Crown continues to pass 1992,
continues past the 30 settlement
and whatever milestone that tree settlement is in.
So that's why we talk bit about the relationship
evolving over time, because post settlement, you know,
what they focus on
and what they, the nature of their relationship
that they want with the ground may be very different,
10, 20, 30, 50 years
post when they sign their treaty settlement,
because their experience evolves too, and
therefore what they're wanting from us.
But what is full and final is the settlement
of those historical claims being 3 19 92.
It's, it's the legal bit, uh,
because what we are doing through a treaty settlement, um,
is, uh, iwi, uh,
or go the right to take a legal claim.
I understand, through the courts, uh, on, based on, uh,
historical breaches of the treaty treaty.
What, so that, that's the full and final
Sense. No,
I understand the structural purpose of it,
but I just wonder, um, in the sort of
evolution of the concept and our ongoing
and the ongoing relationship, whether
that idea of fullness
and finality contradicts an idea of enduring Yeah.
Respectful relationship.
Yeah. I mean, it's, it points
to the whole reason why tele 50 was created, right?
Yeah. Uh, there was the, um, um, question about, well,
once you reach treaty settlement, uh,
and once you reach the end of treaty settlements,
does the office, uh, pack up, turn out the lights
and say, right, that's, that, that's done, uh,
and the country can now all, uh, walk forward?
Well, no, um,
because there is an enduring relationship, uh,
between the Crown, uh, and TEI Maori.
And, and that's why, uh, the, the, the creation of,
um, uh, signaled, uh, exactly that, uh,
in enduring relationship, um, uh,
anticipating a question you might have then about the
transfer of functions, uh, that that doesn't mean that
that idea has gone away.
Uh, and it certainly, um, uh, is the idea that, uh,
we would understand would continue on.
Uh, I think there's a much better understanding across
Crown, uh, that there is an enduring relationship, uh,
with Maori, that that does, um, need to be, uh, honored, uh,
in the everyday practice of government.
We've got a new question from Penny h today. I do have
That question, sorry. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, uh, my question is with respect
to the large number of, uh, tribunal claims
and the job, uh, of res scoping 40 outta 15 moving forward,
is the progression of settlement claims,
or, sorry, not claims, treaty settlements,
very two very different things,
but in that scope of work, is it the view
and the intention of, to look at progressing, uh, any
of the work that's come out of COPA Inquiry claims?
Ah, um, Well, uh, so, so there are different inquiries,
as you know, in, in the tribunal
and, um, well, for, for COPA inquiries.
So, uh, the way that the Crown, uh, responds to, uh,
and in the inquiry itself is to assign a lead agency.
So the whole Order Inquiry, uh, was led by, uh, health, um,
and it's for, for that agency to lead the Crown's response.
Um, I think that, uh, as Copa,
the COPA Inquiry program has progressed, um,
I think the Crown has learned a few things.
Uh, um, this is always the way with, with, with new things,
uh, to be able to, um, respond appropriately to, uh, each
of each of those inquiries.
But the basic structure is to have a lead agency, uh,
I guess Tata Fatigue's role, uh, at least in
that learning period has had been,
we were coordinating a group of, uh, those agencies
that were leads for coup inquiries to swap notes about, uh,
what are we learning, uh, in terms of, um,
the way those inquiries are conducted, the way that, uh,
agencies need to show up, uh, including getting, you know,
chief executive engagement
and then, uh, the way we then deal with reports, uh,
that come out and, and actioning of the, uh, uh,
of the recommendations.
So I'd say that tele itself has had a, a small role, uh,
in trying to, uh, help the crown through that.
Uh, there was a, a cabinet, um, uh, directive that gave us,
uh, that gave some guidance to,
to agencies, and we helped that along.
Uh, but I think, uh, the practice now
of coup inquiries is starting to bid in, uh, the agencies
that lead the Crown response are well aware, uh, of the, um,
the, the demands of, of those inquiries
and to be able to respond to the reports.
Yeah. So with respect to that small role
that you played in bringing groups together, et cetera,
in the re-scope, I imagine
that's now the role of Technic Clinical Clear.
Is that correct? Did I get that correct or,
Uh, um, well, I think it would be yes, in theory, uh,
I'm saying yes in theory, because to be honest, uh,
we haven't needed to, um, convene that, that, uh,
Cross-Agency learning group is it, it was called, uh,
we haven't convened it for AE while now,
so it's not an active group.
Uh, so it's not identified as a particular function
that would be asking CPK to pick up.
So, so the higher then would be the best way
to look towards how those things progress, um, or not
because only treaty settlements are registered
and the obligations under the treaty settlements.
So then to track those Cobar inquiry claims
and the recommendations
and the agency roles, is that now the function
of the Putting Co in the view of,
Um, uh, I'd have to check,
but the, the, um, section eight I report that, uh,
uh, produce each year, uh, does, uh, um,
illustrate how the crowd has responded
to YANG Tribunal recommendations.
The, the checking part for me would be, uh,
does it include coup inquiries, uh, contemporary claims,
and I, I'm not sure about that.
Sorry. But TPK, thank you.
As I say, that's, that's their responsibility currently.
Yeah. Yeah. Great. Uh, next we go
to write Honor Honorable a Adrian.
Um,
So, but just wanted to ask a question about, um, some
of the claimant groups that have kind of stagnated
and seem to be sitting on the list of incomplete, um,
settlements for whatever reason.
If, if there's any future plan to reengage with,
um, those groups and how does that typically happen?
Uh, yes, of course we will want to reengage
because our objective is to conclude treaty settlement
negotiations and conclude treaty settlements.
Um, the groups that are not in active conversations
with the ground are, uh, in
that situation for a number of reasons.
Um, sometimes it's internal dynamics
that they want to work through.
Uh, sometimes we've had a go at at negotiations in the past
and we've found that we haven't been able to reach
that middle ground yet.
Uh, and in other times they just haven't wanted
to engage in negotiations yet.
So those are the sort of three broad areas
for why groups are, we are not actively engaging with them,
even though we are not actively engaging with them.
We still do have relationships with them in,
in various forms and do engage with them as the need arises
or as something comes up.
Um, if a group is wanting to reengage with us, then we,
we have that conversation with them
and part of that conversation with them is talking about
what our active work program looks like
and how they could come on
and when it would be likely for them
to be able to come to the active work. Just
A supplementary mm-Hmm.
Um, so to get them to that point,
is there active consideration, like, um, it might be
political or intervention to get them to that level where,
you know, if that's one of the issues that, um,
hasn't got them to the line yet
In terms of getting them more active?
Yeah, yeah. Could say, for example,
if the payment group didn't like the offer that they got,
um, and rejected it, um, you know, is, which is
definitely the, some political element to that.
Um, is that part of the plan moving forward
to, and, uh, allow them to engage at that level to see if
that can bring them to the table?
Uh, yes. When we look to reengage, it's what's changed in
that environment around are we gonna be able to find that
Yeah, that, that middle ground
So that, that, that could involve
Both Either side moving Yeah, that's what I mean. Yep.
Yep. Something on the equation. Does that
Happen?
Oh yeah. Yes.
Um, and it's just that nature of, of time and circumstances
and that evolution of, of relationships and focus.
We just got this, um,
that document you were talking about.
So the, uh, landscape of, um,
settlements done versus those in progress.
I'm just wondering if you could talk us through
the future focus, um, you know, of those that we have left.
Um, I mean, I get excited when I see deed
of settlement sign, 'cause that's when I know kind
of the legislation's gonna be introduced.
But pre deed of settlement signing,
you've got some steps here.
Um, I'm just wondering if you can give maybe the committee a
bit of a heads up on, um,
potential deeds in the next year.
Uh, you won't be able to go into the, the, um, specifics
of course, but you know, what, what's,
what does our work workload look like?
Um, bit of a
self interesting, um, position for the committee.
But yeah, if you could talk us through, um,
what does next year look like and Yeah.
Um, in terms of next year, I will talk broadly in terms
of not confirming that we'll necessarily have a first
reading for you guys to then pick up, um,
civic committee consideration of the, of the bills.
But there is a, um, large group coming through.
Uh, so we have just initial na which, uh,
Lauren talked about.
Uh, so gonna undertake that ratification process
and then sign the deed.
Um, we are also working towards initialing a deed
of settlement with, uh, lands.
Uh, and, uh, so
therefore, you know, those initially are, are envisaged
for the first part of next year.
Yes. Uh, and then it's, what we also have is
the 12 citizens of Yes.
Uh, that are at varying varying stages.
Some are working towards initialing,
some are working towards deed signing
and some bills are already in the house.
Um, so therefore there's a, a collection of, of bills
that will come through the process as well.
Yeah. Wonderful. Um, new question.
Um, yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
Outta Curiosity, for those who have gone
through the settlement process and, uh,
we talked a lot about overlapping interests
and then they find themselves free
and engaged through the courts
and through, they take litigation ly
'cause of some of the overlapping interests in the work
that might be done by through other settlements.
What role does have in, let's just say,
you know, the case well, does have a role
'cause they've obviously settled, but do they have a role in
any of the future breaches to their view
that might be cur carried through the courts?
Uh, so in terms of that litigation, yes,
because that's in response
to the hierarchy settlements, which we are Yeah.
Actively, that's what I was asking. Yeah. Mentioned, okay.
Is that role quite fully engaged and active
or a little bit more of a oversight, if you will report?
Do you wanna talk to us Nancy? I was gonna say,
or Lee, I was gonna say le
we can talk generally Yeah.
Or Lee too
Math Andrew, the chief legal advisor at
I'm fine Kevin.
So, uh, did you, were you still focused on
that specific litigation or more generally?
Yeah, more general expect,
Yes. I mean,
Raffe, I mean, I think already the questions
and responses have, have identified that, um,
we are involved in, um, I guess challenges throughout the,
the cycle of the treaty settlement process.
Um, they, they start pre-settlement and sort of the mandate
and or overlapping interests, you know,
those are probably the two most difficult parts
of treaty settlements where you've got this sort
of competing, um, interest to resolve internal
and sort of external, uh, through to, um,
quite normal to see that manifested for a range
of settlements to challenges to try
and stop treaty settlements in the higher courts
and sometimes the tribunal.
And again, that tends to reflect those, those two, um, sort
of, uh, mandate and
or sort of overlapping interest type type, um, matters.
We do see a wide range, uh, would increasing number
of challenges in the post settlement space.
Sometimes it's about, um, maybe the deal wasn't quite
as clear as people thought,
and that's not unusual in this sort
of contractual setting anyway.
You know, I think this, you think that, um,
and sometimes, you know, occasionally there are mistakes
with the TRTI was settlement a few years ago and,
and that had to be corrected.
Um, uh, we're also, um,
parliament as, as I'm sure you'll know recently, um,
granted the courts the ability to declare, uh,
legislation inconsistent with the, with the Bill of Rights,
and we're seeing the first such claim
work its way through the courts.
It's before the court of appeal at the moment in relation
to the Naty kanu, um, settlement.
So there's a wide range of things, um, and, and,
and, and, and many others.
And I think there are different reasons for all of that.
Um, some of that mahi will be transferring to Uni Cori,
but, um, there's, um, others depending on sort
of whether it stays on the treaty settlement
and implementation side of with us, we
Kia. Um,
Uh, yep. New question.
Yeah, KDA. Thank you Mr. Chair and thank you.
Um, well answered very clear to me now. Thank you.
Um, my question is in respect to, um, the Iwi Chairs forum
and, and an acknowledgement that, uh, uh,
tier 50 isn't alone in the UEGS forum
in particular plays a lead role there,
but going forward with the re-scope, um, what,
what role does Tata 50 C
for itself in such a forum, if at all?
Um, yeah, so currently, uh,
we act almost like the secretary
for the National Navy Chairs Forum.
Um, so we organize, uh, the quarterlies
and, uh, work with the lead ministers
and the co-chair, um,
do all the organization in the background
that function is transferring to TPK.
So the expectation post that will be that TPK.
The challenge though is that we are arching convener.
So the Minister of Crown, crown Relations is the convener
of the National Chairs Forum.
Charter 50 does most of the work.
So for our perspective
and oversight perspective, charter 50 would need to
continue monitoring, um, TPK in terms of the function,
because that's the work role that they have.
So these are sort of the challenges I suppose, that we have
to work through as we transfer those functions over.
Where does Charter Fifty's role sit
and we need to also engage properly
with the National Chairs Forum.
We also asking questions around the transfer
and the statement of engagement that was quite clear around,
um, you know, the Minister
of Crown relations being the convener along with,
um, national Cheers Forum.
If I Have a, uh, yep.
This is gonna sound like a real sort of this,
this is my dumb question for the day,
for the lay person people that are watching,
why do we have TPK?
Why do we have two 50 as of not together?
Um, oh, have a go. Uh, That's, yeah.
Sort of an obvious question. It's
A good question. Uh, and
it's been, been asked a number of times.
Uh, so, um, I mean, I think there's, there's, uh,
the fo focus of the, the two agencies is different.
Uh, UNI is, uh,
the government's principle policy advisor for, uh,
Maori social, Maori social and economic development.
Their focus is on, uh, Maori outcomes, uh, for,
uh, Tata fatigue.
Um, our focus is a lot more on the Maori crown relationship
and the way that it is conducted, uh,
addressing the historical, uh, aspect
through treaty settlements.
Um, and we're, uh, and,
and into the, the way that the relationship is conducted,
we are much more concerned about making the Crown a better
treaty partner, uh, through raising capability.
So, um, while, uh, uni has a, uh, uh, a Maori social
and economic development, um, focus, uh, uh, does have, uh,
and it's a contemporary case, has an historical, uh,
look at treat through treaty settlements,
and it's the conduct of the relationship, uh,
and making the Crown a better treaty
partner in that relationship.
So that doesn't sound like a conflict to me.
It just sounds like you a different Copa.
We we're absolutely. Ask the question of why it's not
as a whole and you don't get rid of the,
the potential conflict here.
Well, I think it's absolutely complimentary, uh,
and that, um, I mean I think, uh, some of the spaces where,
um, we have worked together with, have been in the, um, uh,
uh, policy space, uh, for contemporary issues.
Um, uh,
but in terms of, uh, providing a focus, uh, for the future,
uh, the idea that we will, uh, only be, uh,
looking at historical treaty settlements
and at Kuana, uh, means it's very clear
that we won't be paying, uh, in a space that, uh,
will be left to, to, uh, to Canada.
Okay. Thank you. There are also historic, uh,
legal legacies, if you will, that have seen a transformation
of Maori, the old Maori affairs.
That's what we now know is really some of it's legacy, some
of it what could be argued hangover.
But to your point, and this is my supplementary,
the Sculping and, uh, that kind of crossover if you will,
and I appreciate that, Warren,
you've already given the dates of we, you know, when you get
when staff will be, and then when February,
I think you said yes, that transition happens.
Uh, one of the concerns I have is all the great work
that TA has done has built a aka of knowledge.
You've literally built a, if you will, of huge knowledge,
uh, across so many different spaces of work
that be focused on Maori and Crown.
Um, the concern I have is that transition
and where does all that knowledge go?
Will it be lost? Is how, what does the transfer look like?
How do we make sure that afterwards, um,
next year's scrutiny, we, we can sit down
and go, okay, was it a success
or has, uh, you know,
has the fallen through the net.
Mm-Hmm. That's the statement.
But a question in there, if you
don't mind offering some of things.
Um, it's a, it is a really good question.
It is a, a, a, um, a central concern, uh,
for the transfer of function.
So, um, I mean, one answer about
how will the knowledge transfer is, is part, uh,
partly it will go with our people, uh, to, to uni.
Uh, they, um, all of their, uh, knowledge of experiences,
uh, ways of working will, they will take with them.
Um, we are also at a, I guess at a more technical level, uh,
we are, uh, in the, in the midst of, uh, trying to, um, uh,
write down, uh, what do those functions look like?
What are the, uh, the key, um, uh, tasks,
the key, the, the key scope of each of the functions
that we'll transfer to uni so
that they are better understood.
Um, we are working, uh, hand in hand with uni.
Um, the first first part is the, uh, the people part
that I described earlier in terms of consultation.
But, uh, through January, February, we'll be, uh,
working more closely with them.
Uh, the intention is to, uh, workshop, uh,
with them the kinds of, uh, through the functions that we,
um, uh, will be transferring so
that there is a good understanding, uh,
in the receiving environment, uh, of what the, what that is.
And then I think into the, I mentioned file transfer and,
and all, and access
and things like that there, um, as well into the future too.
There's, there's gotta be a way of working
between the two agencies, um, that, that has the aim of,
of not losing, um, uh, knowledge of settlements,
um, uh, into the future.
There has to be, uh, the openness that for settlements that,
um, we've negotiated this year.
Uh, if an issue can comes up next year, uh, to
responsible for trying to, uh, engage in that issue, it,
it's not as if we're gonna say, well,
it's not, that's not us.
It's over to you. We've gotta find a way, uh,
that that can happen.
Um, at the same time as, uh, um, uh, uh,
changing our focus to the, the, the things
that do remain on our, on our plate.
Can, can I add to that, Lauren?
Um, so we talk about it,
we've mentioned our performance framework, um, and
because the machinery is reconfiguring,
I don't think it makes our perform,
I think our performance framework is just as valid.
So sustain, restore growth, uh,
there are questions in the transfer about how much of
that put, uh, leads and how much of it it leads.
But I think it's fair to say,
and this is, you know, not long in the job,
but been dealing with, uh, most of the here for,
for a while, years and, and at,
and they're all, um, you know, fairly,
and you'll know this fairly committed
and passionate public servants, uh,
wherever they operate in the system.
Um, and so I think, you know, there's a challenge to say,
well, how do we ensure that we maintain this pipeline
of restore, sustain, grow?
And the new bit, I guess is, um, as Warren
outlined there, Maori outcomes.
Mm. So, you know, and that's what p has been focused on.
Maori development, Maori outcomes, um, health education.
How are the agencies doing?
How are they monitoring those agencies?
That's another piece that they'll just, they'll have
to continue to do.
And then potentially they're picking
up these other functions.
How do we, uh, continue to build, uh,
and maintain the capability of the public sector, the system
to respond, uh, most effectively to iwi Maori in the, um,
crown money relationship.
But I think it's fair to say, as I said,
we've got committed people in our organization,
they've got committed people in the organization.
We are going to send some people over there
with the functions Mm-Hmm.
They transfer. And we expect them to
maintain their commitment and their passion
and, you know, the experience
and the relationships they have to ensure
that our performance framework pipeline is maintained,
uh, I guess to ensure that the
mana and the honor of the crown is.
And furthermore to that answer as well, just to add to,
um, the principles that sit at the,
um, and it's really, really important that those sit in the
how at the how and how we transition.
So as, as what's been said, has a big story,
there's a big responsibility around the narratives,
the historical events, uh, in the man, um, of those.
So we're also working with
and arranging not only for our,
but those as well.
And so, um, with those decisions
that are coming up in the upcoming weeks,
there will also be some decisions
around what that looks like.
Okay, mate. Um, okay. So one sub and then
We'll go supplement. Thank
you. Um, following from this, um, uh, um,
like what I, what I say to people is that, um,
we have a very fierce advocate in Minister Port Tucker.
And I mean that wholeheartedly, from
what I've seen in public, uh, also
behind the scenes closed doors.
Um, can I ask you, what do you feel there's,
there's a lot we've been, we've spoken about
with this transition.
What do you feel are some of the opportunities that,
that you are looking forward to taking out
of this transition,
Out of the transfer of functions?
Mm-Hmm. I mean, I think there, there are opportunities
for the remaining ti to focus on, uh, the, the core
that we, we have in treaty settlements in Taku.
Um, uh, we haven't talked, uh,
we've talked a lot about treaty settlements,
but I'm gonna talk a little bit more about Kuta
because, uh, the, um, uh, well, depending on
how things shake, shake out with the Supreme Court's, uh,
decision this week, uh, in comparison to the,
to the legislation, um, the, the fact is that we are still,
uh, whichever way we look at it, uh, at the, at the start of
the consideration of applications to, for recognition of,
of customary, uh, sprint Marine title rights.
Um, and, you know, there are, there are opportunities, uh,
in there, uh, for us to be looking at, um, uh,
an attractive crowd engagement pathway, uh, to, um,
the, uh, uh, rival, the, the, the high court pathway, um,
and the, the opportunity to be able to, um, we, we need
to find a process that, uh, satisfies the, the aspirations
of the applicants, uh, that, uh, is looking,
that is cost effective, uh, that is, uh,
timely in the outcomes.
Uh, and if we can put together, uh, something that, uh,
starts to reach those kinds of, um, uh, parameters, then,
uh, there's the opportunity, uh, for Tata to, uh,
take forward that that particular copa, uh, in a, um, uh,
in a more, uh, um, in a, in a faster
and more effective, effective way.
Um, we were talking just yesterday that, uh, um,
for Taku Tamana, we were at that, that space, uh, where, um,
perhaps treaty settlements were, um, years and years
and years ago, uh, about, um, defining the,
I'm gonna call 'em the core elements, not the template
for the, for, for a treaty settlement.
If we can identify the core elements for, um,
the recognition of, uh, token may, uh, um, ary rights, then,
um, there are opportunities there, there too.
Um, yeah, we have, we have
Read book for treaty settlements,
and we don't really have any form compare book.
Thank you.
Uh, next we go to, um,
I'm guessing, obviously we're assuming that one
of the other, uh, functions, um, is currently with
that we'll transfer the to, um, is the, um, ing
of 2040, um, if I'm correct in that,
that that's transferring.
Um, yes.
Uh, I, I mean, I think I have to, uh, clarify, uh, uh,
I pointed to, uh, uh, 20, vision 2040 as part
of the ambition of, uh, of te earlier in the calendar year.
Um, uh, have to say that, that that work has not progressed.
Yeah. Um, I think, uh, that, um, given, um,
we're in 2024, very soon to be 2025, that there's a,
there's an urgency to, to that work.
Yeah. Um, and it's one space where, um, uh, we,
we would agree with, uh, David Seymour that, uh,
the country deserves the conversation, um,
that's have a conversation about how we get to 2040.
So picking up on, um, Penny's question
before you've got this, is that, um,
the, uh, all the work that you guys have done in that space,
vision 40, is that, is that, do you think
that's being transferred safely to, um, to Penny?
It, it'll be a question of, uh, how,
how ministers, uh, want to pick it up.
But, um, the vision 2040 work was something that was, um,
uh, uh, I think of interest to, to ministers when we,
we pitched it Mm-Hmm.
Uh, but we kind of got to a, a place where, Hmm.
Uh, this isn't, uh, going to be going ahead, at least not,
uh, with this agency.
Uh, and so I, I'm not sure where that Copa really is at.
Okay. Um, just picking up on Penny's comment round
around the, um, Tam I, um, your humility, right.
Slightly according to Tam Mudi, according all, uh, um,
um, your, um,
and are you able to, to just for a few minutes,
give us a window into, into where you had been going
with the development of your vision for 2040?
Sure. Um, I mean,
and it's part of, uh, you know, what, what the, um,
new Tata fatigue can contribute.
Uh, a lot of our, uh,
corridor here has been about completing
historical treaty settlements.
Mm-Hmm. Well, heck, by 2040, wouldn't
that be a good thing to have done?
Yeah. Um, uh,
or just been talking about Tana, um, uh,
that's gonna be s squarely in our, uh, our frame.
Uh, so advancing customary rights
there, that would be fantastic.
Um, but more broadly for, uh, the, the wider Copa, um,
I think it would be, uh, uh, about
how the Maori crown relationship is conducted, um, that,
you know, we see least litigation, uh,
more good faith engagement, uh, across the board.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and that's why I say that the whole
of the crown carries the Maori crown relationship.
Uh, and it's about how they, uh, how we collectively, uh,
take the relationship forward.
Um, you know, I, I wouldn't want, wanna presume, uh,
uh, just for, uh, what 2040 should look like from, from a,
a crown official's perspective, uh, what we would, uh,
have hoped to have done was to develop that in conjunction,
uh, with, uh, UE Maori.
Uh, we had ideas around, uh, involving, uh, uh, the leaders
of the future, um,
because, uh, 2040 will be dears, uh,
um, and not ours.
Uh, and I'm sure their ambitions, uh, way beyond, uh, some
of the things that, um, uh, we might propose.
Uh, so, you know, the ideas were, uh, big, uh,
they were, um, around, uh, uh, looking to be, um,
beyond, uh, parliamentary terms.
We are, uh, thinking about a, a 16 year commitment thanks
to, to 2040, uh, can't be, um,
but by bit, this is a, a bigger project.
It's a nation building project, uh,
needs the commitment right out to that space.
Uh, and it does need the vision of, of more than the crown,
uh, to, to be able to get there.
Mm. Thank you for sharing that. Good question.
Uh, next we go to pen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, uh, a very quick comment on
that, and this is why linguistic license.
I'm very clear on the words I use the difference
between more ANA
and mm, I have no doubt that the more
skillsets and everything will transfer.
I think that's very admirable.
It would be to the committees
and the house, its benefit if some kind of measurements
to allow us to reflect back on the transition
that's taking place,
and yet to take place to allow some kind
of measures there on both.
And, uh, which is about those,
those identifying those core pillars,
which I think that's great.
That's fantastic. Whether
or not that continues into our journey towards 2040.
So, and now I come to my final questions,
I promise you final question.
Let's go back all the way to the beginning to what, um, MA
has said about tgi first to acknowledge The's role in
wa uh, celebrations.
And I will clear an interest.
I am on TGI National Trust Board.
So my question is, uh,
allows a free ranging answer,
but I I appreciate that the upcoming Ang Day celebrations
role has played in the past.
Um, what advice might you give to, uh, the upcoming,
uh, celebrations
and what might be some of your expectations? Um, it's
Safe to say that he probably
Doesn't need to Victor Goldsmith.
Oh, sorry.
Sorry. Yes. I should have introduced
myself, Victor Goldsmith.
So I'm the director at Maori Crown Relations.
Um, we can expect,
um, quite a lot of angst.
Um, that's the quarter law that we are hearing from,
from up, up north.
Um, so it is gonna be different from beginning of this year.
Uh, so we have to navigate
that We are putting a program together
and discussing that with, uh, minister as we speak around
how that might play out.
Sure. It is quite early in the, in the piece
to have those discussions
because we are on version three at the moment
of the calendar, but we end up with version 200 by anyway.
Um, but so, you know, all of the things that happened, um,
is creating a situation whereby we believe it could be
quite a tense situation.
Um, so that'll be the advice that we'll be putting up,
and then we'll see how that plays out.
Kia, thank you. Thank you.
Can I do a supplement? Yes.
Um, maybe supplementary ish.
I just wanna, um, reflect that the, that we had here
a few weeks ago, a couple of weeks ago, um,
despite whatever opinions anyone has, um,
there was a very beautiful atmosphere,
and I know from a lot of my colleagues
on the National Party side,
we didn't envisage anything will happen
because we know, we just had a feeling you'll be okay.
And I wanna state for the record that I think
that will happen in wa Tangi as well.
Um, but I'd urge, um, people to remember
that we're not going to be voting for the bill to progress.
Thank you.
I bring that, um, looking around.
Any other questions?
Are we talking in the broadest sense? Yes.
Open, slap. Go for your hearts content there, Steve.
Yeah. Um, I mean, I, I kind of wanna return to
that question I asked early on,
and it's about the, the 2040 vision.
Because it seems to me that we
are at a point of a deepening conversation about
recognition of, um,
that foundational agreement in 1840,
which by any reasonable assessment of the expectations
of the TGA who signed
t the 500 plus in the North Island, they
were not seeding sovereignty.
That that is must be widely accepted now.
In fact, I think it is widely accepted, accepted at
what point in the Maori crown relationship
must we, in our maturity as Tonga
and as Crown representatives, acknowledge openly,
actively, and say that Maori never seated sovereignty.
And at what point do we get to that,
and how important is that in how we move
through the coming 16 years from now?
'cause it seems to me to be a shameful idea that by 2014,
we could still not have acknowledgement
that Maori did not see Ty in 1840.
It's a big question I know,
but I wonder if you could reflect on
Well, I, I, I think that just, um, uh,
emphasizes why, uh, that, that, that conversation, that
vision of what do we want to look like in 2040?
What do we wanna celebrate in 2040 as a country, um,
is important to, to have, um, uh,
the, uh, the tribunals just, uh, kicked off.
Its, its constitutional, uh, koup inquiry where, um,
exactly these, uh, issues, uh, will be,
um, focused on.
And, um, uh, while that's at the, uh, evidence,
uh, gathering, uh, stage, I mean, they're having, uh,
it's a, it's a Wang, uh, type, uh, uh, approach.
Uh, the crown, um, uh, is part of
that institutional upper inquiry
and will need to, um, uh, give views.
Uh, it's, it's a big question.
It's a question for the whole of the country.
And I think that that's why, um, you know, uh, uh,
looking out to 2040
and it is, uh, very close, uh, that key question about
what we wanna celebrate and,
and how do we, how do we celebrate ourselves
as a country is there,
and your questions around, uh, um, the particular, uh,
um, sovereignty question, uh, is one
of many questions in there that we would need to, uh,
grapple with, I think, um, uh, outcomes for Maori by
by 2040, if they were equitable on,
on all our social statistics, wouldn't that be a great thing
to be able to celebrate?
Uh, so there are a number of things, uh, that is wide, uh,
that's have the conversation
and have the vision and work towards it.
Um, next we've got a question from, oh, sorry.
Oh, apologies. Um,
TUI Yeah.
I think that it's equally important.
I'm pretty practical person not to lose sight, not
to lose sight of what we can do now.
Um, we, you know, we are working within, um, a framework,
a current framework, so there's conversation around
how we can practically
or how to give practical expression, uh,
toga in today's environment, um, Amador of the north.
And, you know, every conversation in the north is
a conversation.
Mm-Hmm. Um, I think though, you know, um,
and, uh, the earlier question around taking time, uh,
to settle and those types of things, again,
I'm pretty practical in knowing the environment at home
and the need at home.
I think building momentum towards settlement, um,
to actually building momentum, to getting to a table
where we are having a conversation between the crown
and our hapu is the most important thing other than the
roads that could happen in Mm-Hmm.
And I think the second thing is, um, how, uh, again,
how do we have the conversation about meaningful input from,
um, into matters of, um, significance to them?
And I don't think that's a weight conversation.
I think the sooner we get to that conversation, the better.
Got Kia. Thank you, Toi. Um, next we go to,
Uh, thank you.
Look, since we're in the general, um, scope of things,
if you don't mind, I'm just gonna go back to the, um, the,
the, the conversation about post settlement issues.
Um, and I, um, I read through the, um, the document
that was published in March of this year, um, guidance
for the Crown post settlement, um,
crown post settlement issue, sorry,
rather resolution pathway.
And I note that there's, um, it's the three broad, uh,
umbrellas of stage one is resolved stage two reestablish
and stage three reports.
Um, now can I ask you, was the impetus for, for, um,
publishing this guidance, was that,
um, I forgot the name.
I'm sorry. The, um, what was the impetus for publishing this
and how has it been since then?
And if you don't mind, who in, in, in the,
in your department, um, is the primary person?
Is it you, Marian? Yeah.
That, that you direct your colleagues towards this,
Um, kilda for the question.
Um, and, um,
so the impetus in the cabinet paper,
there was a cabinet paper cabinet in 2022, um, that set up,
um, framework, apologies.
No, that, that's fine. Um,
and I think we pulled out some of the appendices, sorry,
I'm going from memory now.
Um, and put them on, um, to the website is to, to kind of
put more prominence to the guidance
because it was behind a cabinet paper,
which was publicly available, but it was just all buried.
Um, so sorry, that was the, what was the,
So that was the impetus.
How has it been since then in terms of a reference point,
um, for you and your team and, um, for others as well? Um,
Yeah. Yeah. So, and
this, that he got, so the guidance itself,
you're talking about the resolution pathways, um,
it's really helpful for, in our work when any,
any issue, and I've said
before that it be a spectrum more minor,
more at the severe end, um, to have a clear pathway,
clear framework, clear kind of steps that we're going
to work with agencies, um,
and post settlement governance agencies.
Usually our focus, our relationship was
with the post settlement governance entity,
but we are trying to our, um, crown to, um,
help them deliver on their voices in short.
So it's really helpful for us to have a clear framework
and also like, when are we going to
take a more escalation step
and whether it's a CE to C conversation,
whether it's the ministers
or as of such a nature, we need to actually go to cabinet.
Um, there's also opportunity to go
through the public service commission as well.
So there's a few leavers,
but actually stepping it out so people know what to expect
and we can kind of, and they,
they actually do it to themselves.
Oh, gee, we better get on with a job
because that's the next step.
So, um, yeah.
If I can, so metric.
So we, um, for those stages, is it mostly, um, uh,
colleagues within the department,
or do you find yourselves, um, branching out, um, and,
and, and bringing in consultants?
I'm presuming with the legal questions that
Behind, you know, like if it's a very technical matter
that's beyond our capability, we might need to branch out.
We'll get some like technical, um, skills in for,
for a period or, um, so it depends on the nature.
Sometimes we also have some help with our engagement too,
um, where we might be brokering a big
discussion between parties
And the final supplementary, um, he, part
of the commentary is relationships restored.
Would you say? For, for the most part,
relationships are restored
after this, um, uh, step by step
Process. Um, I,
what we try
and do when we are engaged in these types
of resolution pathways is we try
and leave our, um, everyone better off.
So, uh, our colleagues
and other agencies are more skilled and capable.
The concept is if something popped up again,
then they would feel able to deal with
that themselves without having necessarily to come to us.
So, um, I have definitely seen,
I've definitely seen some examples.
And actually in the annual report, there's an example with,
and yes,
and there, you know,
the relationship was on a downward turn.
Um, but where, where it was, I, i they were humming
and how they were working together,
and it was, um, a really good example of a a,
a real turnaround.
Um, and yeah, just walking, walking alongside people.
Um, can, can I maybe ask just a quick question?
Your indulgence with your indulgence, you guys are okay?
Yes. Um, in that situation, how long did it take
resolution versus, and it's okay. Answer.
I'm not sure. I'm not so good on chronology,
but you maybe, maybe year. Okay.
Thank you. Okay. Um, no more
Questions. Um, uh,
One from, uh, Adrian, I wanna go back to arrangements
for Ang day and just ask
how much is the gov the government
or the executor's legislative program
impacted on the decisions that you,
or advice that you have to give to, um,
positively or negatively?
So, I'm trying to understand the question.
Can you just probably
Rephrase, how much has the,
the three principles bill impacted on what you're doing?
To be blunt?
No, very little at the moment.
Um, yeah, so we just, we just normally just go
through our normal process in terms of what we do at Ang.
And, uh, so as I said
before, we we're still, uh, crafting it, working within
that Ang National Trust
around and what that might look like.
And, um, but, uh,
that hasn't come up in the conversations to
Date. So how much
in other work that, um,
and particularly focused on Maori crown
relations, has that impacted?
Uh, I mean, I can talk to that.
I mean, the, um, treaty principles bill, we, we
provided comment on, uh, in the development
of the, the policy paper.
Uh, we've had, uh, engagement with the Ministry of Justice
who leads, uh, in, in that space.
Uh, and I think I said earlier that, um, both, uh,
the Ministry of Justice advice
and our advice, uh, um, wasn't necessarily what, uh,
the decision makers, uh, chose.
Uh, so that's, uh, why the bill has, has progressed to the,
the place that it has.
Um, I, I think to connect it to your,
your question about why Tang, that, um,
certainly we are aware the, uh, um, of the, uh, the likely,
uh, atmosphere, um, at, at Wang.
And so that's part of planning.
We have to think about safety
and security type, uh, type issues.
Uh, so that's the, the connection I guess that would be,
would be making.
Uh, but otherwise the, um, you know, the, the politics
of the, uh, uh, is something we can leave to,
to the politicians.
We have our meeting, we'll find it,
but not trust suspect might be, become a little bit clearer,
least version four.
Excellent. Well, thank you. I know Victor Warren, uh,
Marian, uh, uh, Fern
and the rest of your team for, um, the
today and for your Mahi.
Um, maybe we'll just, um, give you a chance if you want
to make some final observations or remarks, uh,
before the end of this, uh, marathon session.
Um, and, uh, then maybe, uh, uh, if you wanna close out
for us, that'd be wonderful.
Mm-Hmm.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, I guess, um,
there's been a lot of discussion about the transfer
and what, uh, will look like going forward.
Um, and it's just to reiterate, I guess, that our,
our people, our servants, um,
but also very focused on, um, this whole framework
from settling treaty claims, um, identifying, clarifying,
uh, uh, fu iwi interests
and Ana, um,
and then staying in the game to ensure that those, uh,
outcomes remain, um, su sustainable
and enduring and are protected in whatever we do.
Um, so as we, um, reconfigure ourselves
and think about how our colleagues atty,
reconfigure, shape up, receive, um, the things
that we've been responsible for, um, as I said
before, our main objective is to, um, maintain the,
the mana of the crown
and, um, at the same time, uh, you know,
provide the best outcomes and, um,
and benefits for, for I
Kilda. Excellent
kilda. Well, we wish you
and your team all the best for the next year, uh, in
that reconfiguration.
And, um, thank you again for coming
before us today on behalf of the committee.
Um, um, thank you. Your work.
Yeah, do, do the honors for us. Many thank you.
Um, just acknowledging that, um,
this is probably the last time that we'll sit with you as
TA 50 is known now.
Um, so with that in mind, that's going to be
teased into the words usher.
Um, but also in the, there's gonna be two, um,
the first Akia is gonna be our, which also speaks
to the echo effect and the
fruits that will come out of this food.
Sure. Um, and the second Akia is for us to,
from the space and so to ourselves, um, from the context
that we've just shared and kind of like be like,
ah, relax.
So, um, that's what's intended in that.